
This book is a work of fiction. Names, charaCters, places, and
incidents either are products of the author's imagination or are
used fictitiously. Any resemblance to actual events or locales or
persons, living or dead, is entirely coincidental.
Copyright © 1986 by Mary Hemingway, John Hemingway,
Patrick Hemingway, and Gregory Hemingway
Preface copyright © 1987 by Macmillan Publishing Company, a
division of Macmillan, Inc.
All rights reserved,
including the right of reproduction
In whole or in part in any fonn.
First Scribner trade paperback- edition 2003
SCRIBNER and design are trademarks of Macmillan Ubrary
Reference USA, Inc., used under license by Simon & Schuster,
the of this work..
For infonnation regarding special discountS for bulk
purchases, please contact Simon & Schuster Special Sales:
1-890-456-6798 or business@Simonandschuster.co!ll
Manufactured in the United States of America
23 25 27 29 30 28 26 24 22
Library of Congress .Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Hemingway, Ernest, IBgg--Ig6I.
The Garden of Eden I Ernest Hemingway; with a preface by
Charles Scribner, Jr.-1st Scribner Pap,erback Fiction ed.
p. cm.
I. Man-woman relationship-France-Riviera-Fiction.
2. Married people-France-Riviera-Fiction. l. Title.
PS3515.E37G37 1995
ISBN-13: 978-0-684-80452-1
ISBN-IO: 0-684-80452-2
Publisher's Note
As was also the case with Hemingway's earlier posthumous
work Islands in the Stream, this novel was not in finished fonn
at the time of the author's death. In preparing the book for
publication we have made some cuts in the manuscript and some
routine copy editing corrections. Beyond a very small number of
minor interpolations for clarity and consistency, nothing has been
added. In every significant respect the work is all the author's. 
,
Preface
by Charles Scribner, Jr.
UP TO THE TIME of his death in 196J Ernest Hemingway was
working on a number of writing projects, all of which were near
enough to completion to be edited and published posthumously. I remember his widow, Mary, to my office with
a large shopping bag filled almost to bursting With photocopies
of unpublished writing left by her husband. This may have been
one of the richest colIections of literary material ever delivered
in so informal a manner. In addition to a number of sketches
and fragments of stories and some completed stories, the bag
contained the typescripts of three major works: a novel set in
Bimini and Cuba, later published under the title Islands in the
Stream, the original transcript of Hemingway's bullfighting
journal, 1he Dangerous Summer, and a major work of fiction to
which Hemingway had given the title The Garden of Eden.
This last work was filled with so many remarkable riches that,
in spite of the fact that Hemingway never completed it, we were
convinced that it should be published. Only the second part
was incomplete, and tHe first half taken by itself, with only a
modest amount- of pruning, provided, a whoUy hannonious and
coherent narrative. 
viii Preface
Upon publication of the novel, our judgment in bringing out
the book as we did was confirmed by its success all over the
world and by the many positive responses of leading critics.
For many readers familiar with Hemingway's other works, The
Garden of Eden may seem to be a departure from his usual'
themes, in so far as it presents an intensive study of the mental
state of an intelligent woman uncontrollably envious of her hus·
band's success as a writer and yearning to change her gender.
But the conception of Hemingway as a writer primarily ab·
sorbed with external action fails to take into account his profound interest in character. On the surface, many of his stories
may seem to deal with exciting physical events, but, like Con·
rad, he was always primarily interested in the effect such eyents
had in the minds of the individuals concerned. As a wnter"he
was a gifted student of human behavior. Mary Hemingway once
told me that he had the uncanny knack of being able to enter a
room full of people and almost immediately divine the relation·
ships among them. '
THE GARDEN OJ EDEN 
''What are you thinking?" the girl asked.
"Nothing."
''You have to think something."
"I was just feeling."
"How?"
"Happy."
"But I get so hungry," she said. "Is it normal do you think? Do
you get so hungry when you make love?"
"When you love somebody."
"Oh, you know too much 'about it," she said.
"No."
"I don't care. I love it and we don't have to worry about any.
thing do we?" .
"Nothing."
"What do you think we should do?"
"I don't know," he said. do you?"
"I don't care at all. If you'd like to fish I should Write a letter
or maybe two and then we could swim before lunch."
''To be hungry?"
"Don't say it. I'm getting hungry already and we haven't fin.
ished breakfast."
"We can think about lunch."
"And. then after lunch?"
'We'll take a nap like good children."
''That's an absolutely new idea," she said. ''Why have we
never thought of that?"
"} have these flashes of intu'itioJ:)," he said. "I'm the inventive
type."
"I'm the destructive type," she said. "And I'm going to destroy
you. They'll put a plaque up on the wall of the building outside
the room. I'm going to wake up in the night and do 'something
to you that you've never even heard of or imagined. I was"going
to last night but I was too sleepy."
''You're too sleepy to be dangerous." 
6 Ern,est Hem-ingway
"Don't lull yourself into any false security. Oh darling let's
have it hurry up and be lunch time."
They sat there in their 'striped fishermen's shirts and the
shorts they had bought in the store that sold marine supplies,
and they were very tan and their ha'ir was streaked and faded by
the sun and the sea. Most people thought they were brother and
sister until they said they were married. Some did not
that they were married and that pleased the girl very much.
In those years only a ve"ry few people had ever come to the
Mediterranean in the time and no one came to Ie Grau
du Rai except a few people from Nimes. There was no casino
and no entertainment and except in the hottest months when
people came to swim there was no one at the hotel. People did
not wear fishermen's shirts then and this girl that he was married to was the first girl he had ever seen wearing one. She had
bought the sh.irts for them and then had washed them in, the
basin in their room at the hotel to take the stiffness out of them.
They were stiff and built for hard wear but the washings softened and now they were worn and softened enough so
that when he looked at the girl now her breasts showed beautifully against the worn cloth.
No one wore shorts either around the vilJage and the girl could
not wear them when they rode their bicycles. But in the village it
did not matter because the people were very friendly and only
the local priest disapproved. But the girl went to mass on Sunday
wearing a skirt and a long-sleeved cashmere sweater with her
hair covered with a scarf and the young man stood in the back of
the church with the men. They gave twenty francs which was
more than a dollar then and since the priest took up the collection himself their attitude toward the church was known and the
wearing of shorts in the village was regarded a,S an eccentricity by
foreigners rather than an attempt against the morality of the
ports of the Camargue. The priest did not speak to them when
THE GAR DEN 0 FED RN 7
they wore shorts but he did not denounce them when they
wore trousers in -the evening the three of them bowed to
other.
"I'll go up and write the letters," the girl said and she got up ,
and smiled at the waiter and went out of the cafe.
"Monsieur is going to fish?" the waiter asked when the young
man, whose name was David Bourne, called him over and
paid him.
"I think so. How is the tide?"
''This tide is very good," the waiter said. "I have some bait if
you want it."
"I can get some along the road."
"No. Use this. They're sandworms and there are plenty."
"Can you Come out?"
"I'm on duty now. But maybe I can come ol!-t and see how you
do. You your gear?"
"It's at the hoteL"
"Stop by for the worms."
At the hotel the young man wanted to go up to the room and
see the girl but instead he found the long, jOinted bamboo pole
and the basket with his fishing gear the desk where the
rO,om keys hung and went back out into the brightness the
road and on down to the cafe and out onto the glare of the jetty.
The sun was hot but there was a fresh breeze and the ti!ie was
j,ust starting to ebb. He wished that he had brought a casting rod
and spoons so that he might cast out across the flow of the water from the canal over the rocks on the far side but instead he
rigged his long pole with its cork and quill float imd let a sandworm float gently along at a depth where he thought fish might
be feeding.
He fished for some time with no luck and watched the mackerel boats tacking back and forth out on the blue sea and the
shadows the high clouds made on the water. Then his float 
8 Ernest Hemingway
went under in a sharp descent with the line angling stiffly and
he brought the pole up against the pull of a fish that was strong
and driving wildly and making the line hiss through the water.
He tried to hold it as lightly as he could and the long pole was
bent to the breaking point of the line and trace by the fish whicb
kept trying to go toward the' open sea. The young man walked
with him on the jetty to ease the strain but the fish kept pulling
so that as he drove a quarter of the rod was forced under water.
The waiter had come from the caM and was very excited. He
was talking by the young man's side saying, -"Hold him', Hold
him. Hold him as softly as you can. He'll have to tire. Don't let
him break. Soft with him. Softly. Softly."
There was no way the young man could be with him except to get into the water with the fish and that did not make
sense as the canal was deep. If I could only walk along the bank
with him, he thought. But they had come to the very end of the
jetty. More than half the pole was under water now. r
"Just hold him softly," the waiter pleaded. "It's a strong trace."
The fish bored deep, ran, zig-zagged and the long bamboo
pole bent with his weight and his rapid, driving strength. Then
he came up thrashing at the surface and then was down again
and the young man found that although the fish felt as strong as .
ever the tragic violence was lessened and now he could be led
around the end of the jetty and up the canal.
"Softly does it," the waiter said. "Oh softly now. Softly for us
all."
Twice more the fish forced his way out to the open sea.and
twice the young man led him back and now he was leading him·
gently along the jetty toward the cafe. '
"How is he?" asked the waiter.
"He's fine but we've beaten him.".
"Don'f say it," the waiter said. "Don't say it. We must tire him.
TIre him. Tire him."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 9
"He's got my ann tired," the young mal) said.
"Do you want me to take him?" the waiter asked hopefully.
"My God no."
"Just easy, easy, easy. Softly, softly, softly," the waiter said.
The young man worked the fish past the terrace of the cafe
and into the canal. He was swimmingjust under the surface but
was still strong and the young man if they would
him all the way up the canal through the length of the town.
There were many other people now and as they went by the hotel the girl saw them out of the window and shouted, "Oh what
a wonderful fish! Wait for me! Wait for me!"
She had seen the fish clearly from above and his length and
the shine of him in the water and her husband with the bamboo
pole bent almost double and the procession of people following.
"When she got down to the canal bank and, running, caught up .
with the people, the procession had stopped. The waiter was in
the water at the edge of the canal and her h.usband was guiding
the fish slowly against the bank where there was a clump of
weeds growing. The fish was on the surface now and the waiter
bent down and brought his hands together from either side and
then lifted the fish with his thumbs in both his and moved
up the bank of the canal with him. He was a heavy fish and the
. waiter held him high against his chest with the head under ·his
chin and the tail flopping against his thighs.
Several men were pounding the· young man on the·back and
putting their anns around him and a woman from the fish market kissed him. Then the girl had her arms around him and
kissed him and he said, "Did you see him?"
Then they all went over to see him laid out on the side of the
road silver as a salmon and dark gunmetal shining on his back.
He was a handsome beautifully built fish with great live eyes
and he breathed slowly and brokenly.
"What is he?" 
10 Er-nest Hemingway
"A loup," he said. ''That's a sea bass. They call them har too.
They're a wonderful fish. This is the biggest one.I've ever seen,"
The waiter, whose name was Andre, came over and put his
arms around David and kissed him and then he kissed the girl.
"Madame, it is necessary," he said. "It is truly necessary. No
one ever caught such a fish on such tackle."
'We ,better have him weighed," David said.
They were at the cafe now. The young man had put the tackle
away, after the weighing, and washed up and the fish was on a
block of ice that had come in the carnian from Nimes to ice
the mackerel catch. The fish had weighed a little over fifteen
pounds. On the ice he was still silver and beautiful but the color
on his back had changed to gray. Only his eyes still looked alive.
The mackerel fishing boats were coming in now and the women
were unloading the shining blue and green and silver mackerel
from the boats into baskets and carrying the heavy baskets on
their heads to the fish house. It was a very good catch. and the
town was busy and happy.
"What are we going to do with the big fish?" the girl asked.
''They're going to take him in and sell him," the young man
said. "He's too big to cook here and they say it would be wicked
to cut him up. Maybe he'U go right up to Paris. He'll end in some
big restaurant. Or somebody very rich will buy him."
"He was so beautiful in the water," she said. "And when Andre held him up. I couldn't believe him when I saw him 011t of
the window and you with your mob following you."
"We'II get a small one for us to eat. They're really wonderful.
A small one ought to be grilled with butter and with herbs.
They're like striped bass at home."
"I'm excited about the fish," she said. "Don't we have wonderful simple fun?"
They were hungry for lunch and the boltIe of white wine was
c'old and they it as they ate the celery remoulade and the
THE GARDEN OF EDEN II
smaIl and the home pickled mushrooms from the big
glass jar. The bass was grilled and the grin marks showed on the
silver skin and the butter melted on the hot plate. There was
sliced lemon' to press on the bass and fresh bread from the bakery and the wine cooled their tongues of the heat of the fried
potatoes. It was good light, dry, cheerful unknown white wine·
and the restaurant was proud of it.
"We're not great conversationalists at meals," the girl said.
"Do I bore you, darling?"
The young man laughed.
"Don't laugh at me, David."
"I wasn't. No. You don't bore me. I'd be happy looking at you
if you never said a word."
He poured her another small glass of the wine and filled
his own.
"I have a big surprise. I didn't teU you, did I?" the girl said.
"\Vhat sort of surprise?"
"Oh it's very simple but it's very complicated."
"Tell me."
"No. You might like it and maybe you couldn't stand it."
"It sounds too dangerous.'"
"It's dangerous," she said. "But don't ask me. I'm going up to
the room if I may."
The young man paid for the lunch and drank the wine that
was left in the bottle. Then he went upstairs. :The girl's clothes
were folded on one of t.he Van Gogh chairs and she was. waiting for him in the bed with the sheet over. her. Her hair wa$ ,
spread out over the pillow and her eyes were laughing and he
lifted the sheet and she said, "Hello, darling. Did you have a .
nice lunch?"
AftelWards they lay together with his ann under her head and
were happy and lazy and he felt her tum her head from side to
side and stroke it against his cheek. It felt silky and barely 
Ernest Hemingway
roughened from the sun and the sea. Then with her hair all forwind over her face so it touched him as her head moved she
to play with him lightly and eXploringIy and then with
delight and'she said, "You do love me, don't you?"
He nodded and kissed the top of her head and then turned
her head and held it and kissed her lips.
"Oh," she said. "Oh."
A long time later they were lying each holding the other close
and she said, "And you love me just the way I am? You're sure."
he said. "So much yes."
"Because I'm going to be changed."
"No," he said. "No. Not changed."
"I'm going to," she said. "It's·for you. It's for me too. I won't
pretend it's not. But it will do something to you. I'm sure but I
shouldn't say it."
"I like surprises I like everything the way it is just now at
this minute."
''Then maybe I shouldn't do it," she said. "Oh I'm sad. It was
$uch a wonderful dangerous surprise. I thought about it for days
. and I didn't decide until this morning."
"If it's something you really want."
"It is," she said. "And I'm going to do it. You've liked everything we've done so far haven't you?"
''Yes.''
"All right." j
She slipped out of bed and stood straight witlt her long brown
legs and her beautiful body tanned evenly from the far beach
where they swam without suits'. She held her sho.ulders back
and ner chin up and she shook her head so her heavy tawny hair
slapped around her cheeks and then forward so it all fell
forward and covered her face. She puIled the striped shirt over
her head and then shook her hair then sat in the chair
in front of the mirror on the dresser brushed it back looking
THE GARDEN OF EDEN '3
at it critically. It feJI to the top of her shoulders. She shook her
head at the mirror. Then she pulled on her slacks and belted
them and put on her fac!ed blue rope-soled shoes.
"I have to ride up to Aigues Mortes," $he said.
"Good," he said. "I'll come too."
"No.1 have to go alone. It's about the surprise."
She kissed him goodbye and went down and he watched her
mount her bicycle and go up the road riding smoothly and easily, her hair blowing in the wind.
The afternoon sun was in the window now and the room was
too wann. The young man washed put on his clothes and
went down to walk on the beach. He knew he should swim but
he was tired and after he had walked along the beach and then
along a path through the salt grass that led inland for a way he
went back along the beach to the port and climbed up to the
cafe. In the cafe he found the paper and ordered himself a fine
a l'eau because he felt empty and hollow from making love.
They had been married three weeks and had come down on
the train from Paris to Avignon with their bicycles, a suitcase
with their town clothes, and a rucksack and a musette bag. They
stayed at a good hotel in Avignon and left the suitcase there
and had thought that they would ride to the Pont du Gard. But
the mistral was blowing so they rode with the mistral down to
Nlmes and stayed there at the Imperator and then had ridden
down to Algues Mortes still with the heavy wind behind them
and then on to Ie Grau du Roi. They had been there ever since.
It had been wonderful and they had been truly happy and he
had not known that you could love anyone so much that you
cared about nothing else and other things seemed inexistent. He
had many problems when he married but he .had thought of
none of them here nor of writing nor of anything but being with
this girl whom he loved and was married to and he did not have
the sudden deadly clarity that had always come after intercourse. 
'4 Ernest Hemingway
That was gone. Now when they had made love they would eat
and drink and make love again. It was. a very simple world and
he had never been truly happy in any other. He thought that it
must be the same with her and certainly she acted in that way
but today there had been this thing about the change and the
surprise. But maybe it would be a happy change and a good surprise. The brandy and water as he drank it and read the local paper made him look forward to whatever it was.
This was the first time since they had come on the wedding
trip that he had taken a drink of brandy or whiskey when they
were not" together. But he was not working and his only rules
about drinking were never to drink or while he was working. It would be good to work again but that would come soon
enough as he well knew and he must remember to be unselfish
about it and make it as clear as he could that the enforced
liness was regrettable and that he was not proud' of it. He was
sure she would be fine about it and she had her own resources
but he hated to think of it, the work, starting when they were as
they were now. It never could start of course without the clarity
and he wondered if she knew that and jf that was why she drove
beyond what they had for something new that nothfug could
break. But what could it be? They could not be held tighter
gether than they were now and there was no badness
wards. There was only happiness and loving each either and
then hunger and replenishing and starting over. .
He found that he had drunk the fine a l'eau and that it was
getting late in the He ordered another and started to
concentrate on the paper. But the paper did not interest him as
it should and he was looking out at the sea with late afternoon
sun heavy on it when he heard her come into the cafe and say in
her throaty voice, "Hello darling."
She came quickly to the table and sat down and lifted her
chin and looked at him with the laughing eyes and the golden
face with the tiny freckles. Her hair was as short as a
THE GARDEN OF EDEN '5
boy's. It was cut with nq compromises. It was back,
heavy as always, but the sides were cut short and the ears that
grew close to her head were clear and th,e tawny Hne of her hair
was cropped close to her head and smooth and sweeping back.
She turned her head and lifted-her breasts and said, "Kiss me
please."
He kissed her and looked at her face and at her hair and he
kissed her again.
"Do you like it? Feel it how smooth. Feel it in back," she said.
He felt it in back.
"Feel on my cheek and feel in front of my ear. Run your
gers up at the sides.
''You see," she said. ''That's the surprise. I'm ,a girl. But now
I'm a boy too and I can do and anything and anything."
"Sit here by me," he said. ''What do you want, brother."
"Oh thank you," she said. "I'll take what you're having. You
see why it's .dangerous, don't you?"
"Yes. 1 see."
"But wasn't I good to do it?"
"Maybe."
"Not maybe. No.1 thought about it. I've thought all about it.
Why do we have to go by everyone else's rules? We're us."
"We were having a good time and 1 didn't feel any rules."
"Would you please just put your hand over it again."
He did and he kissed her.
"Oh you're sweet," she said. "And you do like it. I can feel and
I can tell. You don't have to love it. Just like it at first."
"I like it," he said. "And you have such a beautifully shaped
head that it is very beautiful with the lovely bones of your face."
"Don't you like it at the sides?" she asked. "It isn't faked or
phony. It's a true boy's haircut and not from any beauty shop."
"Who cut it?"
''The coiffeur at Aigues Mortes. The one who cut your hair
a week ago. You told him how you wanted yours cut then 'and 
'.
Ernest Hemingway
I told him to cut mine just the same as yours. He was very nice
and wasn't at all surprised. He wasn't worried at all. He said exactly like yours? And I said exactly. Doesn't it do anything to you,
David?"
''Yes,'' he ,said.
"Stupid people vvill think it is strange. But we must be proud.
I love to be proud."
"So do I," he said. "We'll start being proud now."
They sat there in the cafe and watched the reflection of the
setting sun over the water and watched the dusk come to the
town and they drank the fine a l'eau. People came by.the cafe
without being rude to see the girl because they had been the
only foreigners in the village and had been there now nearly
three weeks and she was a great beauty and they liked her. Then
there had been the big fish today ,and ordinarily there would
have been much talk about that but this other was a big thing in
the village too. No decent girls had ever had their hair cut short
like that in this part of the country and even in Paris it was rare
and strange and could be beautiful or could be very bad. It could
mean too much or it could only mean shOwing the beautiful
shape of a head that could never be shoV\lIl as well.
They ate a steak for dinner, rare, with mashed potatoes and
flageolets and a salad and the girl a.sked if they might drink
Tavel. "It is a gre'at wine for people that are in love," she said.
She had always looked, he thought, exactly her age which was
now twenty-one. He had been very proud of her for that. But
tonight she did not look it. The lines of her cheekbones showed
clear as he had never seen them before and she smiled and her
face was heartbreaking.
In the room it was dark vvith only a little light from outside. It
was cool now with the breeze and the top sheet was gone from
the bed.
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 17
"Dave, you don't mind if gone to the devil, do you?"
"No, girl," he said.
"Don't call me girl."
"Where I'm holding you you are a girl/' he said. He held her
tight around her breasts arid he.,opened and closed his fingers
feeling her and the hard erect freshness between his fingers.
"They're just my dowry," she said., ''The new is my surprise.
Feel. No leave them. They'll be there. Feel my cheeks and the
back of my neck. 01} it feels so wonderful and good and clean
and new. Please love.me David the way I am. Please understand
and love me."
He had shut his eyes. and he 'could feel the long ligJ-tt weight
of her on him and her breasts pressing against him and her lips
on his. He lay there and felt som'ething and then her hand holding him and searching lower and he helped with his hands and
then lay back in the dark and did not think at all and only felt the
weight and the strangeness inside and she said, "Now you can't
tell who is who can YOll?"
"No."
''You are changing," she said. "Oh you are. You are. Yes you are
and you're my girl Catherine. Will you change and be my girl
and let me take you?"
"You're Catherine."
"No. I'm Peter. You're my wonderful Catherine. You're' my
beautiful lovely Catherine. You were so good to change. Oh
thank you, Catherine, so much. Please understand.. Please know
and understand. I'm going to make love to you forever."
_ At the end they were both dead and empty but it was not
over. They lay side by side in the dark with their legs touching
and her head was on his ariD. The 'moon had risen and there
was a little more 'light in the room. She ran her hand explor-
'ingJy down over his belly without looking and said; ''You don't
think I'm wicked?"
"Of course not. But how long have you thought about that?" 
Ernest Hemingway
"Not all the time. But quite a lot. You were so wonderfulto let
it happen."
The young man put his arms around the girl and held her very
tight to him and felt her lovely breasts against his chest and
kissed her on her dear mouth. He held her close and hard and
inside himself he said goodbye and then goodbye and goodbye.
"Let's lie very still and quiet and hold each other and not
think at alI," he said and his heart said goodbye Catherine goodbye my lovely girl goodbye and good luck and goodbye.
Chapter Two
HE STOOD UP and looked up and down the beach, corked the
bottle of oil and put it in a side pocket of the rucksack and then
walked d.own to the sea feeling the sand grow cool under his feet.
He 'looked at the girl on her back on the sloping beach, her eyes
_closed, her arms against her sides, and behind her the slanted
square of canvas and the, first tufts of beach graS$. She ought not
to stay too long in that position with the sun straight up and
down on her, he thought. Then he walked out and dove flat into
the clear cold water and turned.on his back and swam backstroke
out to sea watching the beach beyond the steady beat of his legs
and feet. He turned in the water and swam down to the bottom
and touched the Coarse sand and felt the heavy ridges of it and
then came up to the surface and swam steadily in, seeing how
slow he could the beat of his crawl. He walked up to the
girl and saw that she was asleep. He found his wristwatch in the
rucksack to check the time when he should wake her. There was
a cold bottle of white wine wrapped in a newspaper and with
their towels around it. . He uncorked it removing the 
20 Ernest Hemingway
paper or the towels and took a cool draught from the awkward bundle. Then he sat down to watch the girl and to look
out to sea.
This sea was always colder than it looked, he thought. It did
not really warm until the middle of summer except on the
shallow beaches. This beach dropped off quite suddenly and
the water had been sharply cold until the swimming warmed
him. He looked out at the sea and the high clouds and noticed
how far the fishing fleet was working to the westward. Then he .
looked at the girl sleeping on the sand that was quite dry now
and beginning to blow delicately with the rising wind when his
feet stirred.
Dl:lring the night he had felt her hands touching him. And
when he woke it was in the moonlight and she had made the
dark magic of the change again and he did not say no when she
spoke to him and asked the questions and he felt the change so
that it hurt him all through and when it was finished after they
were both exhausted she was shaking and she whispered to
him, "Now we have done it. Now we really have done it."
Yes, he thought. Now we have really done it. And when she
went to sleep suddenly like a tired young girl and lay beside
him lovely in the moonlight that showed the beautiful new
strange line of her head as she slept on her side he leaned over
and said to her but not aloud, "I'm with you. No matter what
else you have in your head I'm with you and I love you."
In the morning he had been very hungry for breakfast but
he waited for her to wake. He kissed her finally and she woke
and smiled and got up sleepily and washed in the big basin and
slouched in front of the mirror of the armoire and brushed her
hair and looked at the mirror unsmiling and then smiled and
touched-her cheeks with the tips of her fingers and pulled a striped
shirt over her head_and then kissed him. She stood straight so
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
her breasts pushed against his chest and she said, "Don't worry,
David. I'm your good girl come back again,"
But he was very worried now and he thought what will become of us if things gone this wildly and this- dangerously
and this fast? What can there be that will not bum out in a fire
that rages like that? We were happy and I am sure she was
happy. But who ever knows? And who are you to judge and" who
participated and who accepted the change and lived 'it? If that is
what she wants who are you not to wish her to have it? You're
lucky to have a wife like her and a sin is what you feel bad
and you don't feel bad. Not with the wine you don't feel bad, he
told himself, and what will you drink when the wine won't cover
for you?
He took the bottle of oil out of the rucksack and put a little oil
on the girl's chin and on her cheeks and on her nose and found
a blue faded patterned handkerch.ief in the canvas pocket of'the
rucksack and laid it across her breast.
"Must I stop?" the girl asked. "I'm having the most wonderful
dream."
"Finish the dream," he said.
"Thank you."
In a few minutes she breathed very deeply and shook her
head and sat up.
"Let's go in now," she said.
They went in together and swam out and then played under
water like porpoises. When they swam in they dried each other
. off with towels and he handed her the bottle of wine that was
still cool in the roIled newspaper and they each took a drink and
she looked at him and laughed.
"It's nice to drink it for thirst," she said. ''You don't really mind
being brothers do you?"
"No." He touched her forehead and her nose and then her 
22 Ernest Hemingway
cheeks and chin with the oil and then put it carefully above and
behind her ears.
"I want to get behind my ears and ne.ck tanned and over my
cheekbones. All the new places."
''You're awfully dark, brother," he said. "You don't know how
dark."
"I like it," the girl said. "But I want to be darker."
They lay on the beach on the firm sand that was dry now but
still cool after the high tide had fallen. The young man put some
oil on the palm of. his hand and spread it lightly with his fingers
over the girl's thighs and they glowed wann as the skin took the
oil. He went on spreading it over her belly and breasts and the
girl said sleepily, 'We don't look very much like brothers when
we're this way do we?"
"No."
"I'm trying to be such a very good girl," she said. ".Truly you
don't have to worry darling until night. We won't let the night
come in the day."
At the hotel the postman was having a drink while he waited
for the girl to sign for a large forwarding envelope heavy with enclosed letters from her bank in Paris. There were three letters
re-addressed from his bank, too. It was the first mail since they
had sent the hotel as a forwarding address .. The young man gave 1
the postman five francs and asked him to -have another glass of
wine with him at the zinc bar. The girl unhooked the key from
the hoard and said, "I'll go up to the-room and get cleaned up
and meet you at the cafe."
After he finished his glass he said goodbye to the postman
and walked down along the canal to the cafe. It was good to sit
in the shade after walking back bareheaded in the sun from the
far beach and it was pleasant and cool in the cafe. He ordered a
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
vermouth and soda and took out his pocket knife and slit open
his letters. All three envelopes were from his publishers and two
of them were fat with clippings and the proofs of advertisements. He glanced at the clippings and then read the long letter. It was cheerful and guardedly optin:'-istic. It was too early to
tell how the book would do but everything looked good. Most of
the rev,iews were excellent. Of course there were some. But that
was to be-expected. Sentences had been underlined in the reviews that would probably be used in the future advertisements.
His publisher wished he could say more about how the book
would do but he never made predictions as to sales. It was bad
practice. The point was that the book could not have been better received. The reception was sensational really. But he would
see the clippings. The first printing had been five thousand
copies and on the strength of the revi.ews a second printing had
been ordered. The upcoming ad,:ertisements would carry the
phrase Now in Its Second Printing. His publisher hoped that he
was as happy as he deserved to be and taking the rest that he so
richly deserved. He sent his·. best greetings to his wife.
The young man borrowed a pencil from the waiter and commenced to multiply h'50 by one -thousand. That was easy. Ten
percent of that was two hundred and fifty dollars. Five times
that was twelve hundred and fifty dollars. Deduct seven hundred and fifty dollars for the advance. That left five hundred dollars earned by the first printing:
Now there was the second printing. Say that was two thousand. That was twelve and a half of five thousand
dollars. If that was how the contract was. That would be six
hundred and twenty-five dollars. But maybe it did not go up to
twelve and a half percent until ten thousand, Well it was still
five hundred dollars. That would still leave a thousand.
He started to read the reviews and found that he had drunk
.the vermouth without ever noticing it. He ordered another and 
Ern est Hem i n g·w a y
returned the pencil to the waiter. He was stiII reading the reviews when the girl came in bringing her heavy envelope of letters.
"I didn't know they'd come," she said. "Let me see them.
Please let me see them."
The waiter brought her a vennouth and putting it down saw
the picture as the girl unfolded a clipping.
"C'est Monsieur?" he ·asked.
''Yes it is," the girl said and held it up for him to see.
"But differently dressed," the waiter said. "Do they write
about the marriage? May I see a picture of Madame?"
"Not about the marriage. Criticisms of a book by Monsieur."
"Magnificent," said the waiter who was deeply moved. "Is
Madame also a writer?"
"No," the girl said not looking up from the clippings.
"Madame is a housewife."
The waiter laughed proudly. "Madame is probably in the cinema. "
They both read clippings and then the girl put the one she
was reading down and said, "I'm frightened by them and all the
things say. How can we be us and have the things we have
and do what we do and you be this that's in the clippings?"
"I've had them before," the young man said. ''They're bad for
you but it doesn't last."
"They're terrible," she said. '.'They could destroy you if you
thought about them or believed them. You don't think 1 married
you because you are what they say you are in these clippings do
you?"
"No. I want to read them and then we'll seal them up in the
envelope,"
"I know you have to read them. I don't want to be stupid
. about them. But even in an envelope it's awful to have them
with us. It's like bringing !3-long somebody's ashes in ajar."
I
,
,
THE GAR.DEN OF EDEN
"Plenty of people would be happy if their damnep .husbands
had good
"I'm not plenty of people and you're not my damned husband.
I know I'm a violent girl and you're violent too. Please let's not
fight. You read them and if there's anything good you tell me and
if they say anything about the book that's intelligent that we
don't know you tell me."
''The book's made some money already," he told her.
"That's wonderful. I'm so glad. But we know it's good. If the
reviews had said it was worthless and it never made a cent I
would have been just as proud and just as happy."
I wouldn't, the young man thought. But he did not say it. He
went on .reading the reviews, unfolding them and folding them
up again and putting them back in the envelope. The girl sat
opening envelopes and reading her letters without interest.
Then she looked out of the cafe at the sea. Her face was a dark
gold brown and she had brushed her hair straight back from her
forehead the way the sea had pulled it when she had come out of
the water and where it was ·cropped close and on her cheeks the
sun had burned it to white gold against the brown of her skin.
She looked out at the sea and her eyes were very sad. Then she
went back to opening letters. There was one long typewritten
one that she read with concentration. Then she went on opening
and reading the other letters. The young man looked at her and
thought she looked a little as though she were shelling peas.
'What was in letters?" the youngman asked.
"There were checks in some."
"Big ones?"
''Two.''
''That's fine," he said.
"Don't go away like that.. You always said it never made any
difference."
"Have I said anything?" 
Ernest Hemingway
"No. You just went away."
"I'm sorry," he said. "How big are they?"
"N ot much really. But good for us, They've been deposited, It's because I'm married, I told you it was the best thing for us to
be married, I know it doesn't mean an)thing as capital but this
is spendable. We can spend it and it doesn't hurt anybody and it's for that. It doesn't have anything to do with regular income
nor what I get if I l!ve to be twenty-five or if I ever live to b.e
thirty. This is ours for anything we want to do. Neither of us will
have to worry about balances for a while. It's that simple."
"The book has paid back the advance and made about a thousand dollars," he said.
'~Isn't that awfuIIy good when it's only just come out?"
"It's all right. Should we have another one of these?" he asked,
"Let's drink something else."
"How much vennouth did you drink?"
"Only the one~ I must say it was duII."
"I drank two and didn't even taste them."
"\Vhat is there that's real?" she said,
"Did you ever drinkAnnagnac and soda? That's real enough." "Good. Let's try that."
The waiter brought the Annagnac and the young man told
, him to bring a cold bottle of Perrier water instead' of the syphon. The waiter poured two largeAnnagnacs a~d the young man put ice in the big glasses and poured in the Perrier.
'This will fix us," he said. "It's a hell of a thing to drink before
lunch though."
The girl took a long sip. "It's good;" she said. "It has a fresh
clean healthy ugly taste." She took another long sip, "I can re- ally feel it, Can you?"
"Yes," he said and took a deep breath. '''1 can feel it."
She drank from the glass again' and smiled and the laugh wrinkles came at the comer of her eyes. The cold Perrier had
made the heavy brandy alive.
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 27
"For heroes," he said.
"I don't mind being a hero,'~ she $aid, 'We're not like other
people. We don't have to call each other darling or my-dear or
my love nor any of that to make a point. Darling and my dearest and my very dearest and all that are obscene to me and we call
each other by our Christian names. You know what rm trying to
say. \Vhy do we have to do other things like everyone does?"
. "You're a very intelligent girl."
"All right Davie," she said. "Why do we have to be stuffy? Why don't we keep on and tr~vel now when ~t can. never be
more fun? We'll do everything you want. If you'd been a European with a lawyer my money would have been yours anyway. It is yours."
"The hell with it."
"AIl right. The hell with it, But we'll spend it and I think it's
wonderful. You can V\-rite afterwards. That way we can have the
fun before I have a baby for one thing. How do I know when I'll'
have a baby even? Now it's all getting dull and dusty talking about it. Can't we just do it and not talk ~bou~ it?"
'What if I want ~o write? The minute you're not going to do something it will probably ma.ke you want to do it."
"Then write, stupid. You didn't say you wouldn't write. Nobody said anything about worrying if you wrote. Did they?" But somewhere something had been said and now he could
not remember it because he had been thinking ahead.
"If you want to write go ahead and I'll amuse myself. I don't have to leave you when you write do I?"
"But ~here would you like us to go now when people begin to
come here?"
. "Anywhere you want to go. Will you do it, David?"
"For how long?"
"For as long as we want. Six months. Nine months. A year." "AIl right," he said, '
"ReaII),?" 
.8 Ernest Hemingway
"Sure."
"You're awfully good. If I didn't love you for anything else I'd
love yOll for deCisions."
''They're easy to make when you haven't seen how too many
of them can turn out," '
He drank the hero drink Qut it did not taste so good and he or·
dered a fresh bottle of cold Perrier and made a short drink without ice.
"Make me one please. Short like yours. And then let's let it
start and have lunch."
Chapter Three
THAT NIGHT IN BED when they were still a;wake she said in the
dark, 'We don't always have to do the devil things either. Please
know that."
"I know."
"I love it the way we were before and I'm always your girl.
Don't ever be lonely. You know that. I'm how you want but I'm
how I want too and it isn't as though it wasn't for us both. You
don't have to talk. I'm only telling a story to put you to sleep
cause you're my good lovely husband and my brother too. I love
you and we go to Africa I'll be your African girl too,"
"Are we going to Africa?"
"Aren't we? Don't you remember? That was what it was about
today. So v:e could go there or anywhere. Isn't that where we're
goingt'
''Why didn't you say it?"
"I didn't want to interfere. I .said wherever you wanted. I'd go
anywhere. But I thought that was where you wanted."
"It's too early to go to Africa now. It's the big rains and
wards the grass is too high and very cold." 
Ernest Hemingway
could go to bed and keep wann and hear the rain on a tin
roof."
"No, it's too early. The roads turn to mud and you can't get
around and everything is like a swamp and the grass gets so tall
you can't see."
'Then where should we go?"
'We can go to Spain but SeviIIa is over and so is San Isidro in
Madrid and it's early for there too. It's too early for the Basque
coast. It's still cold and rainy. It rains everywhere there now."
"Isn't there a hot part where we could swim the way we do
here?"
"You can't swim in Spain the way we do here. You'd get
rested."
''\iVhat a bore. Let's wait to go there then because I want us to
get darker."
''\iVhy do you want to be so dark?"
"I don't know. Why do you want anything? Right now it's the
thing that I want most. That we don't have I mean. Doesn't it
make you excited to have me getting so dark?"
I love it."
"Did you think I could ever be this dark?"
"No, because you're blond."
"I can because I'm lion color and they can go dark. But I want
every part of me dark and it's getting that way and you'll be
darker than an Indian and that takes us further away from other
people. You see why it's important. l'
"What will we be?"
"I don't know. Maybe we'll just be us. Only changed. That's
maybe the best thing. And we will keep on won't we?"
"Sure. We can go over by the Esterel and explore and find
other place the way we found this one."
'We can do that. There are lots of wild places and nobody
is there in the summer. We could get a car and then we could
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 31
go everywhere. 'Spain too when we want. Once we're really dark
it won't be hard to keep unless we had to live in towns. We don't
want to be in towns in the summer."
"How dark are you going to get?"
"As dark as I can. We'll have to. see. I wish I ,had some Indian
blood. I'm going to be so dark you won't be able to stand it. I
can't wait to go up on the beach tomorrow."
She 'went to sleep that way with her head back and her chin
up as though she were in the sun, on the beach, breathing softly,
and then she curled toward him on her side and the 'young man
lay awake and thought 'about the day. It is very P?ssible th:;tt I
couldn't get started, he thought, and it probably is sound to not
think about it at all and just enjoy what we have. When I have
to work I will. Nothing can stop that. The last book is good and
I must make a better one now. This nonsense that we do is fun
although I don't know how much of it is nonsense and how
much is serious. Dripking brandy at noon is no damn good and
already the simple aperitifs mean nothing. That is not a good
sign. She changes from a girl into a boy and back to a girl
lessly.and happily. She sleeps easily and beautifully and you will
sleep too because alI you truly know is that you feel good. You
did not sell anything for the money, he thought. Everything she
said about the money was true. Actually it all was. true.
thing was free for a time.
What was it that she had said about destruction? He could
not remember that. She'd said it but he could not remember it.
Then he was tired of trying to remember and he looked at the
girl and kissed her cheek very lightly and she did not wake. He
loved her very much and everything about her and he went to
sleep thinking about her cheek against his lips and how the next
day they would-both be darker from the sun and how dark can
she become, he thought, and how dark will she ever reaIIy be? 
I
I
BOOK TWO 
Chapter Four
IT WAS lATE AFTERNOON and the small low car came down from
the black road across the hills and headlands with the dark blue
ocean always on the right onto 'a deserted boulevard that
dered a flat beach of two miles-of yellow sand at Hendaye. Well
ahead on the ocean side was the bulk of a big hotel and a·casino
and on the left there were newly planted trees and Basque villas
whitewashed and brown timbered set in their own trees and
plantings. The two young people in the car rode down the
boulevard slowly out at the magnificent oeach at
the .mountains of Spain that showed blue in this light as the car
passed die casino and the big hotel and went on toward the end
of the boulevard. Ahead was the mouth of the river that flowed
into the ocean. The tide was out and across the bright sand they
saw the ancient Spanish town and the green hills across the bay
and, at the far point, the lighthouse. They stopped the car.
"It's a lovely place," the girl said.
"There's a cafe with tables under the trees," the young man
said. "Old trees." \ 
Ernest Hemingway
"The trees are strange," the girl said. "It's all new planting. I
wonder why they planted mimosas."
"To compete where we've come from."
"I suppose so. It all looks awfully new. But it's a wonderful
beach. I never saw such a big beach in France nor with such
smooth and fine sand. Biarritz is a horror. Let's drive up by,the
cafe."
They drove back up the right side of the road. The young man
pulled the car to the curb and killed the ignition. They crossed
to'the outdoor cafe and it was pleasant to eat by themselves and
be conscious of the people that they did not know eating at the
other tables.
That night the wind rose and in their corner room high up
in the big hotel they heard the heavy fall of the surf on the
beach, In the dark the young man pulled a light blanket up
over the sheet and the girl said, "Aren't you glad we decided to
stay?"
. "I like to hear the surf pound."
"So do I."
They lay close together and listened to the sea. Her head was
on his chest and she moved it against his chin and then moved
up in the bed and put her cheek against his and pressed it there.
She kissed him and he could feel her hand' touching him.
"That's good," she said in the darkness. "That's lovely. You're
sure you don't want me to change?"
"Not now. Now I'm cold. Please hold warm,"
"I love you when you feel cold against me."
"If it gets this cold here at night we'll have to wear pyjama
tops. That will be fun for breakfast in bed."
"It's the Atlantic ocean," she said. "Listen to it."
"We'll have a good time while we're here," he told her. "If you
want we'll stay a while. If you want we'll go. There are plenty of
places to go."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
"We might stay. a few days and see."
"Good. Ir'we do I'd like to start to write."
37
"That would be wonderful. We'll.look around tomorrow. You
could work here in the room if I were out couldn't you? Until we
found some place?"
"Sure."
"You know you must never worry about me because I love you
and we're us against all the others. Please kiss me," she said.
He kissed her.
''You know I haven't done anything bad to us. I had to do it.
You know that."
He did not say anything and listened to the weight of the surf
faIling on the hard wet sand in the night.
The next morning there was still heavy surf and the rain came
in gusts. They could not see the Spanish coast and when it
cleared between the driven squalls of rain and they could see
across the angry sea in the bay there were heavy clouds that
came down to the base of the mountains. Catherine had gone
out in a raincoat after breakfast and had left him to :'Nork in the
room. It had gone so simply and easily that he thought it was
probably worthless. Be careful, he 'said to himself, it is all very
well for you to write simply and the Simpler the better. But do
not start to think so damned simply. Know how complicated it is
and then state it Simply. Do you suppose the Grau du Roi time
was all simple because you could write a little of it simply?
He went on writing in pencil in the cheap, lin.ed, school note-
,book that was' called a cahier and already numbered one in roman numeral. He stopped finaily and put the notebook in a
suitcase with a cardboard box of pencils and the cone-shaped
sharpener, leaving the five pencils he ha4 dulled to point up for
the next day, and took his raincoat from the hanger in the closet 
Ernest Hemingway
and walked down the stairs to the lobby of the hotel. He looked
into the hotel bar which was gloomy and pleasant in the rain
and already had some customers and left his key at the desk.
, The assistant concierge reached into the mailbox as he hung up
the key and said, "Madame left this for Monsieur."
He opened the note which said, David, didn't want to disturb
you am at the cafe love Catherine. He put on the old trench
coat, found a boina in the pocket and. walked out of the hotel
into the rain.
She was at a corner table in the small cafe and before her was
a clouded drink and a plate with one small dark
red· freshwater crayfish and the debris of others. She was very
far ahead of him. "\Nhere have you been, stranger?"
"Just down the road a piece." He noticed that her face was
rain-washed and he concentrated on what rain did to heavily
, tanned skin. She looked very nice too in spite of it and he was
happy to see her this way.
"Did you get going?" the girl asked.
"Good enough."
"You worked then. That's fine."
The waiter had been serving three Spaniards who were sitting
at a table next to the door. He came over now holding a glass and
an ordinary Pernod bottle and a small pitcher of
water. There were lumps of ice in the water. "Pour Monsieur
aussi?" he asked.
''Yes,'' the young man said. "Please."
The waiter poured their high glasses haIr full of the offyellow liquid and started to pour the water slowly into the girl's
glass. But the young man said, "I'll do it," and the waiter took
the bottle away. He seemed relieved to be taking it away and
the young man poured the water in a very thin stream and the
girl watched the absinthe cloud opalescently. It felt warm as
her fingers held the glass and then as it lost the yellow cast and
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 39
began to look milky it cooled sharply and the young man let
the water fall in a drop at a time.
''Why does it have to go io so slowly?" the girl asked.
"It breaks up and goes to pieces if the water pours in too fast,"
he explained. ''Then it's flat and worthless. There ought to be a
glass on top with ice and just a little hole for the water- to drip.
But everybody would know what it was then,"
"I'had to drink up fast before because two G.N.'s were the
girl said.
"C.N.'s?"
"\Nhatyoumacallits nationals. In, khaki with bicycles and
black leather pistol holsters. I had to engulp the evidence."
"Engulp?"
"Sorry. Once I engulped it I can't say it."
''You want to be-careful about absinthe."
"It only makes me feel easier about things."
"And nothing else does?"
He finished making the absinthe for her, holding it well short
of mildness. "Go ahead," he told her. "Don't wait for me." She
took a long sip and then he took her glass from her and drank
and said', ''Thank you, Ma'am. That puts heart in a man."
"So make your own, you clipping reader," she said.
"\Nhat was that?" the young man said to her. .
"I didn't say it."
But she had said it and he said to 'her, ''Why don't you just
shut up about the clippings."
"Why?" she said, "leaning toward him and speaking too loudly.
''"Why should I shut up? Just because you wrote this morning?
Do you think I married you because you're a writer? You. and
your clippings."
"All right," the young man said. "Can you tell me the rest of it
when we're by ourselves?"
"Don't ever think for a moment I won't," she said. 
Ernest Hemingway
"I guess not," he said.
"Don't guess," she said. ''You can be certain."
David Bourne stood up and went OVer to the hanger and lifted
his raincoat and went out the door without looking back.
At the table Catherine raised her glass and tasted the absinthe very carefully and went on tasting it in little sips.
The door opened and David came back in and walked up to
the table. He was wearing his trench coat and had his hoina
pulled low on his forehead. "Do you have the keys to the car?"
"Yes," she said.
"May I have them?"
She gave them to him but said, "Don't be stupid, David. It
was the rain and you being the only one who had worked. Sit
down."
"Do you want me to?"
"Please," she said.
He sat down. That didn't make much sense, he thought. You
got up to go out and take the damned car and stay out and the
hell with her and then you come back in and have to ask for the
key and then sit down like a slob. He picked up his glass and
took a drink. The drink was good anyway.
'''What are you going to do about he asked.
"You say where and I'll eat it with yOu. You do still love me,
don"t you?"
"Don't be silly."
"That was a sordid quarrel," Catherine said.
"The first one too."
"It was my fault about the clippings."
"Let's not mention the god damned clippings."
''That's what it was all about."
"It was you thinking abollt them when you were drinking.
Bringing them up because you were drinking."
"It sounds like regurgitating," she said. "A'WfuI. Actually my
tongue just slipped making a joke." .
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
''You had to have them in your head to bring them ,out that
way. "
"AIl right," she said. "I thought maybe it was all over."
"It is."
'Well why do you keep on insisting and insisting about it for
then?"
"We shouldn't have taken this drink."
"No. Of course not. me. But you certainly needed
it. Do you think it will do you any good?"
"Do we have to do this now?" he ask,ed.
"I'm certainly going to stop it. It bores me."
''That's the one damned word in the language I can't stand."
"Lucky you with only one word like that in the language."
"Oh shit," he said. "Eat lunch by yourSelf."
"No. I won't. We'll eat lunch and behave like human
beings."
"All right."
"I'm sorry. It really was a joke and it just misfired.
that was all." 
Chapter Five
- THE TIDE WAS FAR OUT when David Bourne wbke and the sun
was bright on the beach and the sea was a dark blue. The hills
showed green and J.1ew washed and the clouds had gone from
the mountains, Catherine still sleeping and he looked at
her and watched her regular'breathing and the sun on her face
and thought, how strange that the sun on hel' eyes should not
wake her.
Mter he had taken a shower and brushed his teeth and
shaved, he was hungry for breakfast but he pulled on a pair of
shorts and a sweater-and found his notebook and pencils and
the sharpener and sat at the table by the"window that looked Qut
over the estuary of the river 'to Spain. He started to write and he
forgot about Catherine and what he saw from the window and
the writing went by itself as it did with him when he was lucky.
He wrote it exactly and the sinister part only showed as the light
feathering of a smooth swell on a calm day marking the reef ,beneath.
When 'he had worked for a time, he looked at Catherine, still
THE GAR DEN 0 FED E N 43
sleeping, her lips smiling now and the rectangle of sunlight from
the open window falling across the brown of her body and lighting her dark face and tawny head against the rumpled white of
the sheet and the unused pillow. It's too late to get bre;akfast now,
he thought. I'll leave a note go down to the cafe and get a
cafe creme and something. But while he was putting his work
away Catherine woke and came over to him as he was closing the
suitcase and put her arms around him and kissed him on the
back of his neck and said, "I'm your lazy naked wife."
"What did you wake up fo.r?"
"I don't know. But tell me where you're going and I'll be there
in five minutes."
"I'm going to the cafe to get some breakfast."
"Go ahead and I'll join YOl . .\. You worked didn't you?"
"Sure."
'Weren't you wonderful to after yesterday and everything. I'm
so proud. Kiss me and look at us in the mirror on the bathroom
door."
He-kissed her and they looked into the full length mirror.
"It's so nice not to feel overdressed," she said'. ''You be good
and don't get in any trouble on your way to the cafe. Order me
anneufaujambon too. Don't wait for me. I'm sorry I made you
wait s010ng for breakfast."
At the cafe he found the Il10ming paper and the Paris papers
of the day before and had his coffee and milk and the Bayonne
ham 'with a big beautifully fresh egg that he gJ;"ound coarse pepper over sparsely and spread a little mustard on before he broke
the yolk. When Catherine had not come and her egg was in danger of getting cold he ate it too, swabbing the flat dish clean with
a piece of the fresh baked bread.
"Here comes Madame," the waiter said. <lI'll bring another
plat for her."
She had put on a skirt and cashmere sweater and pearls and 
44 Ernest Hemingway
toweled her head but combed it damp and straight and wet and
the tawny color of her hair did not show to make the contrast
with her incredibly darkened face. "It's such a beautiful day,"
she said. "I'm sorry to be late."
"Where are you dressed for?"
"Biarritz. I thought I'd drive in. Do you want to come?"
"You want to go alone."
"Yes," she said. "But you're welcome."
As he stood she said, "I'm going to bring you back a surprise."
"No, don'f."
"Yes. And you'll like it."
"Let me go along and keep you from doing anything crazy."
"No. It's better if I 'do it alone. I'll be back in the afternoon.
And don't wait for lunch."
David read the papers and then walked Qut through the town
looking for chalets that might be for renf or for a part of town
that might be good to live i,n and found the newly built up area
pleasant but dull. He loved the view across the bay and the estuary to the Spanish side and the old gray stone of Fuenterrabia
and shining white of the houses that spread out from it and the
brown mountains with the blue shadows. He wondered why the
stann had gone so quickly and thought it ml.!-st have been only
the nor:them edge of a stann that came in across the Bay of Biscay.' Biscay was Vizcaya but that was the Basque province further down the coast well beyond San Sebastian. The mountains
that he saw beyond the roofs of the border town ofII'lln were in
Guipuzcoa and beyond them would be Navarra and Navarra
was Navarre. And what are we doing here, he thought, and what
am I doing walking through a beach resort town looking at
newly planted magnolias and bloody mimosas and watching
for to-rent signs on- phony Basque villas? You didn't work hard
enough this morning to make your brain that stupid or are you
just hung over from yesterday? You didn't work at all really.
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 45
And you better soon' everything's going too fast and
you're going with it and you'll be through before ever you know
it. Maybe you're through now. AIl right. Don't start. At least you
remember that much: And he walked on through the town, his
vision sharpened by spleen and tempered by the ash beauty of
the day.
The breeze from the sea was blOwing through the room and
he was reading with his shoulders and the small of his back
against two pillows and another folded behind his head. He was
sleepy after lunch but he felt hollow with waiting for her and he
read and waited. Then he heard the door open and she came in
and for an instant he did not know her. She stood there with her
hands below her breasts on the cashmere,sweater and breathing
as though she had been running.
"Oh, no," she said. "No."
Then she was on the bed pushing' her head against him saying, "No. No. Please David. Don't you at all?"
He held her head close against his chest and felt it smooth
close clipped and coarsely silky and she pushed it hard against
him again and again.
'What did you do, Devil?"
She raised her head and looked at him and her lips pressed
against his and she moved them from side to side and moved on
the bed so her body was pressed against his.
"Now I can teU," she said. "I'm so glad. It was such a big
chance. I'm your new girl now so we'd better find out,"
"Let me see."
"I'll show you but let me go a minute."
She came back and stood by the bed with the sun on her
through the window. She had dropped the skirt and was barefoot wearing only the sweater and the pearls. 
Ernest. Heming.way
'Take a good look," she said. "Because this is I am."
He took a good look at the long dark legs the straight standing body the dark face and the sculptured tawny head and she
looked at him and said, "Thank you."
"How did you do it?"
_"Can I tell you in bed?"
"If you tell me in a hurry."
"No. Not in a hurry. Let me tell. First I had idea on the
road somewhere after Aix en' Provence. At Nimes-when we were
walking in the garden I think. But I didn't know how it would
work or how to tell them how to do it. Then I thought it out and
yesterday I decided,"
David stroked his hand over her head from her neck over the
top of her head to her forehead.
"Let me tell," she said. "I knew they must have good coiffeurs
in Biamtz because of the English. So when I got there I went to
the best place and I told the coiffeur that I wanted it all brushed
forward and he brushed it and it came down to my nose and I
could hardly see through it and I said I wanted it cut like a
boy when he would first go to public school. He asked me
what school so I said '£ton or Winchester because they were the
only schools I could remember except Rugby and I ,didn't want
Rugby certainly. He said which. So I said Eton but forward all
the way. So after 'he was finished and I looked like the most attractive girl who ever went to Eton Ijust had him keep on shortening it until Eton was all gone- and then I had him keep on
shortening it. Then he said very severely that is not an Eton
crop, Mademoiselle. And I said I didn't want an Eton crop,
Monsieur. That was the only way I knew how to explain what I
wanted and it is Madame not Mademoiselle. So then I had him
shorten it some more and then I kept him shortening it and it is
either wonderful or terrible. You,don't mind it on my forehead?
\¥hen it was Eton it fell in my eye."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 47
"It's wonderfuL"
"It's awfully classic," she said. "But it feels like an animal.
Feel it."
He felt it.
"Don't worry about it being too classic," she said. "My mouth
balances it. Now can we make love?"
She bent her head forward and he pulled the sweater over her
head and-down off her arms artd bent over her neck to unhook
the safety clasp.
"No leave them.';
She lay back on the bed her brown legs tight together and her
head against the flat sheet the pearls slanted away from the dark
rise of her breasts. Her eyes were shut and her arms were by her
sides. She was a new girl and he saw her mouth was changed
too. She was breathing very carefully and she said, "You do
everything. From the beginning. From the very beginning."
"Is this the
"Dh yes. And don't wait too long. No don't wait-"
In the night she lay curled around him with her head below
his chest and stroked it softly across him from one flank to another and then up to put'her lips on his and put her arms
around him and said,_ "You're so lovely and loyal when you are
asleep and you didn't wake and didn't wake. I thought 'you
wouldn't and it was lovely. You were so loyal to me. Did you
think it was a dream? Don't wake. I'm -going to sleep but if I
don't I'll be a wild girl. She stays awake and takes care of you.
You sleep and know I'm here. Please sieep."
In the morning when he woke there was the lovely body that
he knew close against him and he looked and saw the waxed-wood
dark shoulders and neck and the fair tawny head close and smooth
lying as a'small animal and he shifted down- in the bed and
___ _ 
Ernest He,mingway
turned toward her and kissed her forehead with her hair under
his lips and then her eyes and then gently, her mouth.
"I'm -asleep."
"So was I." .
"I know. Feel how strange. All night it was wonderful how
strange."
"Not strange."
"Say so if you want. Oh we fit so wonderfully. _Can we both go
to sleep?"
"Do you want to be asleep?"
"Us both asleep,"
"I'll try."
"Are you asleep?"
"No,"
"Please try."
"I'm trying."
"Shut your eyes then. How can you if you won't shut
your eyes?"
"I like to see you in the morning all new and strange,"
'Was I good to invent it?"
"Don't talk."
"It's the only way to slow things. r have already. Couldn't you
tell? Of ,course you could. Couldn't you tell now and now and
now like our hearts beating together it is the same I know it's
only that that counts but we don't count it's so lovely and so
good so good and lovely-"-
She came back to the big room and went to the mirror and sat
and brushed her hair looking at herself critically.
"Lefs have -breakfast in bed," she said. "AIJ:d we have
champagne if not wicked? In the brut they have Lanson and
Perrier·Jouet of the good'. May 1 ring?"
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 49
''Yes,'' he said and went under the shower. Before he put it on
full force he could hear her voice on the telephone.
When he came out she was sitting back very formally against
. two pillows with all the pillows neatly shaken out and placed
two and two at-the head of the bed.
"Do 1 look all right with my head wet?"
"It's just damp. You dried it with the towel."
"I can cut it shorter on the forehead. I can do that myself. Or
you can."
"I'd like it if it came over your eyes,"
"Maybe"it will," she said. "Who knows? Maybe we'll get tired
of being classical. And today we'll stay on the beach aU through
noon. We'll go way far down it and we can tan really when the
people all come in for lunch and then we'll ride to St. Jean to eat
when we're hungry at the_Bar Basque. But first you'll make us
go to the beach because we need to."
"Good."
David moved a chair over and put his hand close on hers and
she looked at him and said, 'Two days ago 1 understood every·
thing and then the absinthe made me tum on it."
"I know," David told her. ''You couldn't help it."
"But I hurt you about' the clippings."
"No," he-said. ''You tried. You didn't make it."
"I'm so sorry, David. believe me."
"Everybody has strange things that mean things to them. You
couldn't help it."
"No," the girl said and shook her head.
"It's all right then," David said. "Don't cry. "It's all right."
"I never cry,;' she said. "But 1 can't help it."
"I know it and you're beautiful when you cry."
"No. Don't say it. But 1 never cried before did I?"
"Never."
"But will it be bad for you if we stay here just two days on 
Ernest
the beach? We haven't had any chance to swim and it would be
silly to have been here and not to swim. Where are we going to
go when we leave here? Oh. We haven't decided yet. We'll probably decide tonight or in the morning. Where would you suggest?" ' .
"I think anywhere would be fine," David said.
'Well maybe that's where we will go,"
"It's a big place,"
"It's nice to he alone though and I'll pack us nicely."
"There's nothing much to do except put in toilet things and
close two bags,"
"We can leave in the morning if you want. Truly I don't want
to do anything to you or have any bad effect on you."
The waiter knocked on the door.
"There was no' more Perrier-jouet, Madame, so I brought the
Lanson."
She had stopped crying and David's hand was still close on
hers and he said, "I know."
Chapter Six
THEY HAD SPENT the morning at the Prado and now were sitting
at a place in a building with thick stone waIls. It was cool and
very old. There were wine casks around the walls. The tables
were old and thiCk and the chairs were worn. The light came
from the door, The waiter brought them glasses of
from the lowland near Cadiz called the Mari.smas with thin
slices of jambn serrano, a smoky, hard cured ham from pigs that
fed on acorns, and bright red spicy salchichOn, another even
spicier dark sausage from a town called Vich and anchovies and
garlic olives. They ate these drank more of the manzanilla,
which was light and nutty tasting.
Catherine had a Spanish-English Method book with a green
cover on the table close to her hand and David had a stack of the
morning papers. It was a hot day but coo'l in the old building
and the waiter asked, "Do you want gazpacho?" He was an old
man and he filled their glasses again.
"Do you think the senorita would like it?"
"Try her," the waiter said gravely as though he were speaking
of a mare. 
Ernest Hemin,gway
I t came in a large .bowl with ice floating with the slices ~f
crisp cucumber, tomato, garlic bread, green and red peppers, and the coarsely peppered liquid that tasted lightly of oil and vinegar.
"It's a salad soup," Catherine said. 'iIt's delicious."
"Es gazpacho," the waiter said.
They drank Valdepeiias now from a big pitcher and it started
to build with the foundation of the marismeiio only held back
temporarily by the dilution of the gazpacho which it moved in
on confidently. It built solidly. .
"\\!hat is this wine?" Catherine asked.
"It's an African wine," David said.
"They always say that Africa begins at the P~nees,"
Catherine said. "I remember how impressed I was when"J first heard it."
"That's one of tho~e easy sayings," David said. "It's more complicated than that. Just drink it." .
"But how can I tell about where Africa begins if I've never
been there? People are always telling you tricky things." "Sure. You can tell."
'~e Basque country certainly wasn't like Africa or anything I ever heard about Africa."
"Neither is Asturias nor Galicia but once you're in from the
coast it gets to be Africa fast enough." . .
"But whr didn't they ever paint that country?" Catherine
asked. "In all the backgrounds it is always the mountains out by the Escorial."
"The sierra," David said. "Nobody wanted to buy pictures of Castilla the way you saw it. They never did have landscape painters. The painters painted what was ordered."
"Ex~ept Greco's Toledo. It's terrible to have such a wonderful
country and no good painters ever paint it," Catherine said.
"What should we eat after the gazpacho?" David said. The
I
I
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 53
proprietor, who was a short.middle-aged man, heavily built and
square faced, had come over. "He thinks we ought to have meat
of some kind."
"Hay solomillo muy bueno," the owner insisted.
"No, please," Catherine said. '1ust a salad."
"Well, at least drink a little wine," the proprietor said and refilled the pitcher from the spigot of the cask behind the bar.
"I shouldn't drink," Catherine said. "I'm sorry I'm talking so much. I'm sorry if I talked stupidly. I usually do."
''Yo~ talk very interestingly and awfully well for a hot day like this. Does the wine make you talkative?"
"It's a different sort of talkative than absirithe," Catherine
said. "It doesn't feej'd~ngerous. I',,:,e started on my good new life
and I'm reading now and .looking outward and trying not to
think about myself so. much and I'm going to keep it uP' but we
ought not to be in any town this time of year. Maybe we'll go. The whole way here I saw wonderful things to paint and I can't
paint at all and never could. But I know wonderful things to write and I can't even write a letter that isn't stupid. I never wanted to be a painter nor a writer until I came to this country.
Now it's just like being hungry all the time and there's nothing
you can ever do abo~t it."
''The country is here. You don't have to do anything about it.
It's always here. The Prado's here," David said.
'There's nothing except through yourself," she said. "And I
don't want to die and it be gone." .
''You have every mile we drove. All the yellow country and the
white hills and the chaff blowing and the long lines of poplars
. by the road-:-You know what you saw and what you felt and it's
yours. Don't you ,have Ie Grau du Roi and Aigues Mortes and all
the Camargue that we rode through on our bikes? This will be
the same."
"But what about when I'm dead?" 
54 Ernest Hemingway
"Then you're dead."
"But I can't stand to be dead."
"Then don't let it happen till it happens. Look at things and
listen and feel."
. ''What if I can't remember?" )
He had spoken about death as though it did not matter. She
drank the wine and looked at the thick stone walls in which
there were only small windows with bars high up that gave onto
a narrow street where the sun did not shine. The doorway,
though, gave onto an a:rcade and the bright sunlight on the
worn stones of the square.
''When you start to live olltside yourself," Catherine said, "it's
all dangerous. Maybe I'd better go back into our world, your and
my world that I up; we made up I mean. I was a great success in that world., It was only four weeks ago. I think maybe r
wiH be again."
The salad came and then was its greenness on the 'dark
table and the sun on the plaza beyond the arcade.
"Do you feel better?" David asked.
''Yes,'' she said. "I was thinking so much about myself that I
was getting impossible again, like a painter and I was my own
picture. It was awful. Now that rm all right again I hope it still
lasts."
It had rained han:! and now the heat was broken. They were in
the cool dimness of the big room in The Palace
and had bathed together in the deep water in the long deep tub
and then had turned the plug and let the fuII force of the water
splash and flow over them, swirling as it drained away. They had
blotted each other with the huge towels and then come to the
bed. As they lay on the bed there was a cool breeze that came
through the slats of the blinds and moved over them. Catherine
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 55
lay propped on her elbows with her chin on her hands. "Do you
think it would be, fun if I went back to being a boy again? It
wouldn't be any trouble."
"I like you the way you ,are now."
"It's sort of tempting. But I shouldn't do it in Spain I suppose.
It's such a formal country."
"Stay the way you are."
"What makes your voice be different when you say it? I think
I'll do it."
"No. Not now."
''Thank you for the not now. Should I make love this time as
a girl and. then do it?"
''You're a girl. You are a girl. You're my lovely girl Catherine."
''Yes I am your girl and I love you and I love you and I love
you."
"Don't talk."
''Yes I will. I'm your girl Catherine and I love you please 1 love
you always always always-"
''You don't have to kE;ep saying it. I can telL"
"I like to say it and I have to say it and I've been aHne girl and
a good iirl and I will again. I promise I will again'."
''You don't have to,say it." .
"Oh yes I do. I say it and -I said it and you said it. You now
please. Please you."
They lay quiet for a long time and she said, "I love you so
much and you're such a good husband."
blessed."
'Was I what you wanted?"
''What do you think?"
"I hope I was."
''You were." 
. E r.n est Hem i ngway
"I promised truly and I wlll and I'll keep it, Now can I be a boy
again?"
''Wh y. '"
"Just for a little while."
"Why?"
"I loved it and I don't miss it but I'd like to be again in bed at
night if it isn't bad for you. Can I be again? If it's not bad for
you?"
"The hell with if it's bad for me."
"Then can I?"
"Do you really want to?"
He had kept from saying have to so she said, "I don't have to
but please if it's all right. Can I please?"
"AIl right." He kissed her and held her to him,
"Nobody can tell which way I am but us, I'll only be a boy at
night and won't embarrass you. Don't worry about it please,"
"All right. boy."
, "I lied when I said I didn't have to. It came so suddenly today."
He shut his eyes and did not think and she kissed him and it had
gone further now and he could tell and feel the desperateness,
"Now you change. Please. Don't make me change you. Must
I? AIl right I will. You're changed now. You are. You did it too. You
are. You, did it tqo. I did it to you' but you did it. Yes you did.
You're my sweet dearest darling Catherine. You're my sweet my
lovely Catherine. You're my girl my dearest only girl. Oh thank
you thank you my girl-"
She lay there a long time and he thought that she had gone to
sleep. Then she moved away very slowly lifting herself lightly on
her elbows and said, "I have a wonderful surprise for myself for
tomorrow; I'm going to the Prado in the m'oming and see all the
pictures as a boy."
"I give up," David said.
. Chapter Seven
IN THE MORNING he got up while she was still sleeping and went
out into· the bright early morning freshness of the high plateau
air. He walked in the street up the hill to the Plaza Santa Ana
and had breakfast at a cafe and read the local papers. Catherine
had wanted to be at the Prado at ten when it opened and before
he he"had set the alarm to wake her at nine. Outside on the
street, walking up the hill he had thought of
beautiful rumpled head that looked like an anCIent com lymg
against the white sheet, the pillow pushed away, the upper sheet
showing the curves of her body. It lasted a month,."he thought,
or almost. And the other time from Ie Grau du ROI to Hendaye
was two months. No, less, because she started thinking of it in
Nimes. It wasn't two months. We've been married three months
and two weeks and I hope I make her happy always but in this I
do not -think anybody can take care of anybody. It's to
stay in it. The difference i,s that she asked this time, he told himself. She did ask.
When he had read the papers and then paid for his breakfast
and walked out into the heat that had come back to the plateau 
58 Ern est Hem i ngw.ay
when the wind had changed, he made his way to the cool, formal, sad politeness of the bank, where he found mail that had
been forwarded froni. Paris. He opened and read mail while he
waited through the lengthy, many-windowed fonnalities of
cashing a draft which had been sent from his bank to this, their
Madrid correspondent.
Finally with the heavy notes buttoned into his jacket pocket he came out into the glare again and stopped at the newsstand
to buy the English and American papers that had come in on the
morning Sud Express .. He bought some bullfight weeklies to
wrap the English language papers in and then walked down the
Ganera San Geronimo to the cool friendly morning gloom of the Buffet Italianos. There was no one in the place yet and he
remembered that he had made no rendezvous with- Catherine.
"What will you drink?" the waiter asked him.
"Beer," he said.
"This isn't a beer place."
"Don't you have beer?"
"Yes. But it's not a beer place:"
"Up yours," he said and re-rolled the papers and wEmt out and
walked- across the street and back on the other side to tum to
the left ~nto the CaIIe Vittoria al?-d on to the Cervezerfa Alvarez.
He sat at a table under the awning in the passageway and drank
a big cold glass of the draft beer.
The waiter was probably only making conversation, he
thought, and what the man said was quite true. It isn't a beer
place. He was just being literal. Hewasn't being insolent. That
was a very bad thing to say and he had no defense against it.
It was a shitty thing to do. He drank a second beer and called
the waiter to pay.
'Y la Senora?" the waiter said.
"At the Museo del Prado. I'm going to get her."
"Well, until you get back," the waiter said ..
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 59
He walked back to the hotel by a downhill shortcut. The key
was at the desk so he rode up to their floor and left the papers and the mail on a table in the room and locked most of the
money in his suitcase. The room was made up and the shutters
were lowered against the heat so that the room was darkened.
He washed and then ,sorted through his mail and took four letters out and put them in his hip pocket. He took the Paris editions of The New York Herald, the Chicago Tribune and the London Daily Mail down with him to the bar of the hotel stopping at the desk to leave the key and to ask the clerk to tell
Madame, when she came in, that he was in the bar.
He sat on a stool at the bar and ordered a marismeiio and
opened and read his letters while he ate the garlic-flavored olives
from the saucer the bartender had placed before him with his
glass. One 0.£ the letters had two cuttings Qf reviews of his novel
from monthly magazines and he read them with no feeling that
they dealt with him or with anYthing that he had written.
He put the cuttings back in the envelope. They had been
understanding and perceptive reviews but to him they had
meant nothing. He read the letter from the publisher with the
same. detachment. The book had sold well and they thought that
it might continue selling on into the fall although nobody could
ever tell about such things. Certainly, so far, it had received an
extraordinarily fine critical reception and the way would be open for his next book. It was a great advantage thafthis was his second and not his first novel. It was tragic how often first novels
were the only good novels American writers had in them. But
this, his publisher.went on, his second, validated all the promise his first had shown. It was an Ul1usual summer in New York, cold
and wet. Oh Christ, David thought, the 'hell with how it was in
New York and the hell with thai: thin-lipped ba.stard Coolidge fishing for trout in a high stiff collar in a fish hatchery in the Black Hills we stole from the Sioux and the Cheyenne and 
60 Ernest Hemingway
bathtub-gInned-up writers wondering if their baby does the Charleston. And the hell with the promise he had validated, What promise to whom? To The Dial, to The Bookman, to The
New Republic? No, he had ,shown it. Let me show you my promise that I'm going to validate it. What shit.
"Hello, young man," said a voice. 'What are you looking so indignant about?"
"Hello, Colonel," David said and felt suddenly happy. "What the hell are you doing here?"
The Colo.p.eI, who had deep blue eyes, sandy hair and a
tanned face that looked as though it had been carved out of flint
by a tired sculptor who had broken his ~hiseI on it, picked up David's glass and tasted 'the marismei'io.
"Bring me a bottle of whatever this young man is drinking to that table," he said to the bartender. "Bring a cold bottle. You
don't need to ice it. Bring it immediately."
''Yes sir," said the bartender. ''Very good sir."
"Come along," the .colonel said to David, leading him to the
table in the comer of the room. "You're looking very welL"
"So are you."
Colonel John Boyle was wearing a dark blue suit of a cloth
that looked stiff.but cool and a blue shirt and black tie. "I'm al·
ways well," he said. "06 you want a job?"
"No," said David.
"Just like that. Don't even ask what it is." His voice sounded
as though he had hawked it up out of a dusty throat.
The wine came and the waiter fiJled two glasses and put down
saucers of the garlic olives and of hazelnuts.
"No anchovies?" the Colonel asked. "V\'hat sort of a fonda isthis?"
The bartender smiled and went for the anchovies.
"Excellent wine," th~ Colonel said. "First rate. I always hoped )Qur taste would improve. Now why don't you want a job? You've
just finished a book."
THE GARDEN OF ·EDEN
"I'm on my h oneymoon. " "Silly expression;" the Colonel said. "I never liked it. It sounds
sticky. Why didn't you say you've just been married? It makes no
difference. You'd be worthless in any event."
"\\That was the job?"
"No use talking about it now. \\Tho did you marry? Anyone I
know?"
"Catherine Hill."
"Knew her father. Very odd type. Killed himself in a car. His
wife too."
"I never knew them.".
''You never knew him?"
"No"
, "Str~nge. But perfectly understandable. He's no loss' to you as
a father.in·law. The mother was very lonely they say; Stupid way for grown up people to be killed. Where did you meet this girl?"
"In Paris."
"She has a silly uncle who lives there. He's really worthless.
Do you know him?"
"I've seen him at the races."
"At Longchamps and Auteuil. How cou ld you hi"'" e pIt.
"I didn't marry her family." .
"Of course n'ot. But you always do. Dead or alive."
"Not the uncles and aunts."
"Well anyway, have fun. You know, 1 liked the _book. Has it
done well?"
"It's done pretty well."
"It moved me very deeply," the Colonel said. ''You're a decep·
tive son of a bitch."
"So are you, John."
"I hope so," the Colonel said.
. David saw Catherine at the door and stood up. She came over
to them and David said, 'This js Colonel Boyle."
"How do you do, my dear?" 
Ernest Hemingway
Catherine looked at him an'd smiled and sat down at the
table. David watched her and it seemed as though she were
holding her breath.
"Are you tired?" David asked.
"I think so."
"Have a glass of this," the Colonel said.
"Would it be all right if I had an absinthe?"
"Of course," David said. "I'll have one too."
"Not for me," the Colonel said to the bartender. ''This bottle's
lost freshness. Put it back to chill and bring me a glass from
a cold bottle."
"Do you like the real Pemod?" he asked Catherine.
"Yes," she said. "I'm shy with people and it helps."
"It's an excellent drink," he said. "I'd join you but I have work
I must do after lunch."
"I'm sorry I forgot to make a rendezvous," David said.
''This is very nice."
"I stopped by for the mail at the bank.- There's quite a lot for
you. I left it in the room."
"I don't care about it," she said.
"I saw you in the Prado looking at the Crecos," the Colonel
said.
"I saw you too," she said. "Do you always look at pictures as
though you owned them and were deciding how to have them
properly?"
the Colonel said. "Do you always look at them as
though you were the young chief of a warrior tribe who had
ten loose from his councillors and was looking at that marble of
Leda and the Swan?"
Catherine blushed under her dark tan and looked at David
and then at the Colonel.
"I like you," she said. "Ten me some more."
"I like you," he said. "And I envy David. Is he everything you
want?"
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
"Don't you know?" . "
"'To me the visible world, is visible,'" the Colonel said. Now
go on and take another sip of that wormwood·tasting truth
serum. "
"I don't need it now."
"Aren't you shy now? Drink it anyway. It's good for yo':!. You're
-the darkest white girl I've ever seen. Your father was very dark
though." _ . "
"I must have his skin. My mother was very fair.
"I never knew her."
"Did you know my father well?"
"Quite welL"
"How was he?"
"He was a very difficult charming man. Are you really
shy?"
"Truly. Ask David."
''You get over it awfully qUickly."
f th '" ''You rode over it. How was my a er. .
"He was the shyest man 1 ever knew and he could be the most
charming."
"Did he have to use Pemod too?"
"He used everything."
"Do I remind you of him?"
'''Not at all."
"That's good. David?"
"Not in the least." .
'That's even better. How did you know 1 was a boy in the
Prado?"
'''Why shouldn't you be?"
"I only started it again last evening. I was a girl for almost a
month. Ask David." .
''You don't need to say ask David. W'hat are you right now?"
"A boy if it's all right with you."
"It's fine wit h B me. ut you ' re no t" . 
Ernest Hemingway
"I just wanted to say it," she said. "Now that I said it I don't
have to be it. But it was wonderful in the Prado. That was why I
wanted to tell David about it."-
"You'll have plenty of time to tell David."
''Yes,'' she said. 'We have time for things."
'Tell me where you got so dark," the Colonel said. "Do you
know how dark you are?"
"That was from Ie Grau au Roi and then not far from la
Napoule. There was a cove there with a trail thafwent do'Wl1 to
it through the pines. You couldn't see it from the road."
"How long did it take to get so dark?"
"About three months."
"And what are you going to do with it?" "w. 't"h 'd"J,'b bd ' ear I, S e S8I. ts very ecoming in ,e ."
"I shouldn't think you'd want to waste it in to'Wl1."
"The Prado isn't wasting. I don't really wear it. It's me. I really
am this dark. The. sun just develops it. I wish I was darker."
''You probably wiIl be then," the Colonel !'iaid. "Do you have
other things like that to look forward to?"
"Just every day," Catherine said. "I look forward to every day."
"And has today been a good one?')
''Yes. You know it has. You were there."
'Will you and David lunch with me?"
"Ail right," Catherine said. ''I'll go up and change. Will you wait for me?" .
"Don't you want to finish your drink?" David asked.
"I don't care about it," she said. "Don't worry about me. I won't be shy."
She walked to the door and they both looked after her.
"Was I too rough?" the Colonel asked. "I hope not. She's a
very lovely girl."
"I just hope I'm good for her."
''You are. How are you doing yourself?"
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
"All right I think."
"Are you happy?"
''Very.''
"Remember everything is right un,til it's wrong. You'll know
when it's wrong."
''You think so?"
"I'm quite sure. If don't it doesn't matter, Nothing will
matter then."
"How fast will it go?"
"I didn't say anything about speed. What are you talking
about?"
"Sorry."
"It's-what you have, so have a lovely time."
'We do."
"So I see. There's only one thing."
"What?"
"Take good care of her."
''That's all you've got to tell me?"
"One small thing more: The get's no good."
''There isn't any get yet."
"It's kinder to shoot the get."
"Kinder?"
"Better."
They talked about people for a while, the Colonel speaking
outrageously, and then David saw Catherine come through the
door wearing a white sharkskin outfit to show how really dark
she was.
''You .do really iook extraordinarily beautiful," the Colonel
said to Catherine. "But you must try to get darker."
''Thank you. I will," she said. 'We don't have to go out now in
heat do we? Can't we sit in the cool? We can eat
in the grill."
- ''You're lunching with me," the Colonel said. 
66 Ern est Hem i n g way.
"No please. You're lunching with us."
David stood up uncertainly. There were more people at the
bar now. Looking down at the table he saw that he had drunk
Catherine's drink as weIl as his own. He did not remember
drinking either of them.
It was the siesta time and they lay on the bed and David was
reading by the light that came in the window on the left of the
bed where he had pulled up one of the slatted curtains about a
third of its length. The light was reflected from the bUilding
across the street. The curtain was not pulled high enough to show the sky.
''The Colonel liked me being so dark," Catherine '.We
must ,get to the sea again. I have to keep it."
'We'll go there whenever you want."
"That will be wonderful. Can I tell you something? I have to.'" ''What?'' .
"I didn't change back to be a girl for lunch. Did I behave all right?"
"You didn't?"
"No. Do you mind? But now I'm your boy and I'll do anything' for you."
David continued reading.
"Are you angry?"
"No." Sobered, he thought.
"It's-simpler now."
"I don't think so."
"Then I'll be careful. This morning everything I did felt so
right and happy, so clean and good in the daYlight Couldn't I try
now and we see?"
"I'd rather you didn't."
"Can I kiss you and try?"
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
"Not if you're a boy and I'm a boy."
His chest felt as though there were an iron bar inside it from
one side to the other. "I wish you hadn't told the Colonel."
"But he. saw me, David. He brought it up and he knew all
about it and understood. It wasn't stupid-to tell him. It was better. He's our friend. If I told him he wouldn't talk. If I didn't tell
him he had a right to."
''You can't trust all people like that."
"I don't care about people. I only care about you. I'd never
make scandals with other people."
"My chest feels like it is locked in iron."
"I'm sorry. Mine so happy."
"My dearest Catherine."
''That's good. You call me Catherine always when you want. I
am your Catherine too. I'm always Catherine when you need
her. We'd better 'go to sleep or should we start and see what
happens?"
"Let's first lie very quiet in the dark," David said and lowered
the latticed shade and they lay side by side on the bed in tIle big
room in The Palace in Madrid where had walked in
the Museo del Prado in the light of day as a boy and now she
would show the dark things in the . light and there would, it
seemed to him, be no end to the change. 
Chapter Eight
IN TIlE BVEN RETIRO in the morning it was as fresh as though it
was a forest. It was green and the trunks of the trees were dark
arid the distances were all new. The lake was' not where it had
been and when they saw it through the trees it was quite
changed.
"You walk ahead," she said. "I want to look at you,''-
So he turned away from her and walked to where there was a
bench and sat down. He could see a lake at a long distance and
knew it was too far to ever walk to. He sat there on the bench
and she sat down beside him and said, "It's all right." .
But remorse had been there to meet him in the Retiro and
now it was so bad he told Catherine that he would meet her at
the cafe of The Palace.
"Are you all right? Do you want me to come with you?"
"No. I'm all right. I just have to go."
"I'll see you there," she said.
looked particularly beautiful that morning and she
at theIr secret and he smiled at her and then took his remorse
to the cafe. He did not think he would make it but he di4 and
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 69
later when Catherine came he was finishing his second absinthe
and the remorse was gone.
"How are you, Devil?" he said.
"I'm your devil," she said. "Could I have one of those too?"
The waiter went away pleased to see her looking so handsome
and so happy and. she said, ''\¥hat was it?"
"I just felt rotten but I feel fine now."
'Was it that bad?"
"No," he lied.
She shook her head. "I'm so sorry. I hoped there wouldn't be
any bad at all."
"It went away."
"That's good. Isn't it lovely to.be here in'the summer and no'
on:e here? I thought. of something."
"Already?"
'We can stay on and not go to the sea. This is ours now. The
town and here. We could stay here and then drive back straight
through to la Napoule."
''There aren't many more moves to make."
':Oon't. We've only just started."
"Yes ... we can always go back where we started."
"Of course we can and we will."
"Let's not talk about it," he said.
He had felt it start to come back and he took a long sip of his
drink.
"It's a very strange thing,"'he said .. "This drink tastes exactly
like remorse. It has the true taste of"it and yet it takes it away."
"I don't like you to to take it for that. We aren't like that.
We mustn't be."
"Maybe I am."
"You mustn't be." She took a long sip out of her glass and another long sip and looked around and then at him. "I can do it.
Look at me and watch it happen. Here in the outdoor cafe of 
Ernest Hemingway
The Palace in IYIadrid and you can see the Prado and the' street
and the sprinklers under the trees so it's real. It's awfully
brusque. But I can do it. You can see. Look. The lips are your girl
again and I'm all the things you really want. Haven't I done it?
Tell me."
''You didn't have to."
"Do you like me a.s a girl," she said very seriously and then smiled.
"Yes," he said.
"That's good," she said. "I'm glad someone likes it because it's
a god damned bore."
"Don't do it then."
"Didn't you hear me say I did it? Didn't you watch me do it?
. Do you want me to wrench myself around and tear myself in
two because you can't make up your mind? Because you won't
stay with anything?"
''Would you hold it down?"
"Why should I hold it down? You want a girl don't you? Don't
you everything that goes with it? Scenes, hysteria, false
accusations, temperament isn't that it? I'm holding it down. I
won't make you uncomfortable in front of the waiter. I won't
make the waiter uncomfortable. I'll read my damned mail. Can'
we send up and get my mail?"
"I'll go up and get it."
"No. I shouldn't be here by myself."
'That's right," he said.
''You see? That was why I said to send for it."
"They wouldn't give a botones the key,to the room. That was
why I said I'd go."
"I'm over it," Catherine said. "I'm not going to act that way.
Why should I act that way to you? It was ludicrous and undignified. H was so silly I won't even ask you to forgive me. Besides
I have to'go up to the room anyway."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 7'
"Now?'"
"Because I'm a god damned woman. I thought if I'd be a girl
stay a girl I'd haye a baby at least. Not even that."
'That could be my fault."
"Don't let's ever talk about faults. You st;ay here and I'll hring
back the mail. We'll read our mail and be nice good intelligent
American tourists who are disappointed because they came to
Madrid at the wrong-time of year."
At lunch Catherine said, ''We'll go back to la Napoule. There
is no one there and we'll be quiet and good and work and take
care of each other. can drive to Aix too and see all the
Cezanne country. We .didn't stay there long enough before."
"We'll have a lovely time."
"It isn't too soon for you to start to work again is it?"
"No. It would be goo d to start now. J'" m sure.
''That will be wonderful and I'll study Spanish really for when
we come back. And I have so much I have to read."
"We have lots to do."
"We'll do it too." 
BOOK THREE
- .-- --- - ---,. 
Chapter Nine
THE NEW PLAN lasted a little more than a month. They had three
rooms at the end of the long low rose·coJored Provenc;al. house
where they had stayed before. It was in the pines on the Esterel
side of la Napoule. Out of the windows there was the sea and
from the garden in front of the long house where they ate under
the trees they could see the empty beaches, the high papyrus
grass at the delta of the. small river.8!ld across the bay was the
white curve of Cannes with the hills and the far mountains behind. There was no one staying at the long hOllse now in sl,Immer and the proprietor and his were pleased to have them
back.
Their bedroom was the big room at the end. It had windows
on three sides and was cool that summer. At night they smelled
the pines and the sea. David worked'in a room at the further
. end. He started early each morning and when he was finished he
would find Catherine and they would go to a cove in the rockS.
where there was a sand beach to sun and to swim: Sometimes
Catherine was gone with the car and ,he would wait for her and 
Ernest Hemingway
have a drink out on the terrace after his work. It was impossible
to drink pastis after absinthe and he had taken to drinking
whiskey and Perrier water. This pleased the proprietor, who was
_ now doing a g09d defensive summer business with the presence
of the two Bournes i"n the dead summer season. He had not
hired a cook and his wife was doing the cooking. One maid servant looked after the rooms and a nephew, who was an apprentice waiter. seI\led at table.
Catherine enjoyed driving the small car and went on buying
and coIlecting trips to Cannes and to Nice. The big winter season shops were closed but she found extraVagances to eat and
solid values to drink and located the where she could buy
books and magazines.
David had worked very hard for four days, They had spent all
the afternoon in the sun on the sand of a new cove they had
found and they had been in the water until they were both tired
and then come home in the evening' with salt dried on their
backs and in their hair to have a drink and take and
change,
In bed the breeze came in from the sea, It was cool and they
lay side by side in the dark with the sheet over them and Catherine said. "You said I was to tell you."
"I know,"
,She leaned over him and held his head in her hands and
kissed him. "I want to so much, Can I? May I?"
"Sure."
"I'm so happy. I've made a lot she said. "And this
time I'm not going to start so bad and wild."
'What sort of plans?"
"I can tell but it would be better to show it. We could do it tomorrow, Will you go in with me?"
"Where?"
"To Cannes where I went when we were here before. ,He's a
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 77
very good coiffeur. We're friends and he's better than the one in
Biarritz because he understood right away."
"What have you been doing?"
"I went to see him this morning while you were working and
I explained and he it and understood and thought it
would be fine. I told him I hadn't decided but that if I did I'd try
to get you to have yours cut the same way."
"How is it cut?"
"You'll see, We'll go together, It's sort of bevelled back from
the natural line. He's very enthusiastic. I think it's_because he's
crazy about the Bugatti. Are you afraid?"
"No."
"I can't wait. He wants to lighten it really but we were afraid
you might not like it."
'The sun and the salt water lighten it.
"This-would be much fairer. He said he could make it as fair
as Scandinavian. Think how that would be with our dark skin.
And we could make yours-lighter too."
"No. I'd feel funny."
"Who do you know here that makes any difference? You'd get
lighter swimming all summer anyway."
He did not say anything and she said, ''You won't have t9.
We'll just do mine and maybe you'll want to. We can see."
"Don't make plans, Devil. Tomorrow I'll get up very early and
work and you sleep as late as you can."
"Then write for me too." she said. "No matter ifit's where I've
'- been· bad put in how mucWI·love you."
-"I'm nearly up to now."
"Can you publish it or would it be bad to?"
"I've only tried to write it."
"Can I ever read it?"
-·"1£1 ever get it right."
. "I'm so proud of it already and we won't have any copies for 
Ernest Hemingway
sale and none for reviewers and then there'll never be clippings
and you'll never be self conscious and we'll always have it just
for us."
David Bourne woke when it was light and put on shorts and a
shirt and went outside. The breeze had died. The sea was calm
and the day smelled of the dew and the pines. He walked bare
footed across the flagstones of the terrace to the room at the far
end of, the long house and went in and sat down at the table
where he worked. The windows· had been open over.night and
the room was cool and full of early morning promise.
He was writing about the road from Madrid to Zaragossa and
the rising and faIling of the road as they came at speed into the
country of the red buttes and the little car on the then dusty
road picked up the Express train and Catherine passed it gently
car by car, the tender, and then the engineer and fireman, and
finally the nose of the engine, and then she shifted as the road
switched left and the train disappeared into a tunnel.
"I had it," she had said. "But it went to ground. Tell me if I can
get it again."
He had looked at the Michelin map and said, "Not for a
while."
"I'll let it 'go then and we'll see the country." As the road
climbed there were poplar trees along the river and the· road
climbed steeply and he felt the car accept it and then Catherine
shift again happily as it flattened the steep grade.
Later, when he heard her voice in the garden, he stopped
writing. He the suitcase with the cahiers of manuscript
and went out locking, the door after him. The girl would use the
pass key to dean the room.
Catherine was sitting at breakfast on the terrace. There was a
refl-and-white checked cloth on the table. She wore her old Grau
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 79
du Roi striped shirt fresh-washed and shrunk now and much
faded, new gray flannel slacks, and espadrilles.
"Hello," she said. "I couldn't sleep late."
''You look lovely."
''Thank you. I feel lovely. "
''Where did you get those slacks?"
"I had them made in 'Nice. Bya good tailor. Are they all right?"
"They're very well cut. They just look new. Are you going to
wear them into town?"
"Not town. Cannes in the off season. Everybody will next
year. are wearing our shirts now. They're no good 'With
skirts. You don't mind do you?"
"Not at all. They look right. 'They just looked so well creased."
After breakfast while David shaved and showered and then
pulled on a pair of old flannels and a fisherman's shirt and found
his espadrilles Catherine put on a blue linen shirt with an open
collC!-r and a heavy white linen skirt.
'We're better this way. Even if the slacks are right for here
they're too show-off for this morning. We'll save them."
It was very friendly and offhand at the coiffeur's but very professional. Monsieur Jean, who was about David's age and
looked more Italian than French, said, "I will cut it as she asks.
Do you agree, Monsieur?"
"I don't belong to the syndicate," David said. "I leave.it to you
two."
"Perhaps we should experiment on Monsieur," Monsieur
Jean said. "In case anything goes wrong."
But Monsieur Jean began cutting Catherine's hair very carefully and skillfully and David· watched her dark serious face
. above the smock that came dose around her neck. She looked
into the hand mirror and watched the comb and scissors lifting 
80 Ernest Hemingway
and snipping. The man was working like a sculptor, absorbed
and serious. "I thought about it all last night and this morning,"
. the coiffeur said. "If you don't believe that, Monsieur, I understand. But this is as important to me as your metier is to you."
He stepped back to look at the shape he was making. Then he
snipped more rapidly and finally turned the chair so the big mirror was reflected in the small one Catherine held.
"Do you want it cut that way above the ears?" she asked the
coiffeur.
"As you like. I can make it more degage if you wish. But it will
be beautiful as is if we are going to make it truly fair."
"I want it fair," Catherine said.
He smiled. "Madame and I have spoken of it. But I said it
must be Monsieur's decision."
"Monsieur gave his decision," Catherine said.
"How fair did Monsieur say he wished it to be?"
"As fair as you can make'it," she said.
"Don't say that," Monsieur Jean said. ''You must tell me."
"As fair as my pearls," Catherine said. ''You've seen'them
plenty of times."
David had come over and was watching Monsieur Jean stir a
large glassful of the shampoo wfth a wooden spoon. "I have the
shampoos made up ,with castile soap," the coiffeur said. "It's
warm. Please come over here to the basin. Sit forward," he said
to Catherine, "and put this cloth across your forehead."
"But it isn't even really a boy's haircut," Catherine said. "I
wanted it the way we planned. Everything's going wrong."
couldn't be more a boy's haircut. You must believe me."
He was lathering her head now with the foamy thick shampoo with the acrid odor.
When her head had been shampooed and rinsed again and
again it looked to David as though it had no color and the water
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 8.
tunnelled through it shOwing only a wet paleness. The coiffeur
put a towel over it and rubbed it softly. He was very sure aboutit.
"Don't be desperate, Madame," he said. "Why would 1 do
anything against your beauty?"
"I am desperate and there isn't any be3iuty."
He dried her head gently and then kept the towel oV,er her
head and brought a hand blower and began to play it through
her hair as he combed it forward.
"Now watch," he said.
As the air drove through her hair it was turning from damp
drab to a silvery northern shining fairness. As the wind of the
blower moved through it they watched it change.
''You shouldn't have despaired," Monsieur Jean said, not saying Madame and then remembering. ;'Madame wanted it fair?"
"It's better than the pearls," she said. ''You're a great man and
I was terrible."
Then he rubbed his hands together with something from a
jar. ''I'll just touch it with this," he said. He smiled at Catherine
very happily and passed his hands lightly over her head.
Catherine stood up and look.ed at herself very seriously in the
mirror. Her face had never -been so dark and her hair was like
the bark of a young white birch tree.
"I like it so much," she said. ''Too much."
She looked in the mirror as though she had neYer seen the
girl she was looking at.
"Now we must do Monsieur," the coiffeur said. "Does Monsieur wish the cut? It's very conservative but it's also sportif."
"The cut," David said. "I don't think I've had a haircut in a
month."
"Please'make it the same as mine," Catherine said.
"But shorter," David said. 
Ernest Hemingway
"No. Please just the same."
Whenit was-cut David stood up and ran his -hand over his
head. It felt cool and comfortable.
"Aren't you going to let him lighten it?"
"No. We've had enough miracles for one day."
-"Just a little?"
"No."
David looked at Catherine and then at his own face in the
mirror. His was as brown as hers and it was her haircut.
''You really want it that much?"
''Yes I do, David. Truly. Just to tty it a little bit. Please."
He looked once more in the mirror and walked over then and
sat down. The coiffeur looked at Catherine.
"Go ahead and do it," she said.
Chapter Ten
THE PATRON WAS SITTING at one of his tables on the terrace of the
long house with a bottle of wine, a glass and an empty coffee
cup reading the de Nice when the blue car came up in.
a rush on the gravel and Catherine and David got out and came
walking down the flagstones to the terrace. He had not expected
them back so soon and he was nearly asleep but he stood up and
said the first thing that came in his head as they opposite
him.
"Madame et Monsieur ant fait decolorer les cheveux. C'est
bien."
"Merci Monsieur. On le fait toujours dans le mois d'aotlt."
"C'est bien. C'est tres bien."
"That's nice," said Catherine to David. "We're good clients.
What the good client does is tres bien. You're tres bien. My God
you are."
In their room a good sailing breeze was blowing in: from the
sea and the room was cold.
uI love that blue shiit," David said. "Stand there like that in it." 
Ernest Hemingway
"It's the color of the car," she said: "Would it look nicer mthout a skirt?"
"Everything on you looks nicer mthout a skirt," he said. "I'm
going out and see that old goat and be an even better client."
He came.back mth a bucket of ice and a bottle of the champagne that the proprietor had ordered for them and that they
had drunk so seldom and he held two glasses on a small tray in
his other hand.
"This ought to be fair warning for them," he said.
'We didn't need it," Catherine said.
'We can just try it. It won't take fifteen minutes to cool."
"Don't tease. Please come to bed and let me see you and feel
you."
She was taking his shirt up over his head and he stood up and
helped her.
After she was asleep David got up and looked at himselfin the
bathroom mirror. He picked up a brush and brushed his hair.
There was no other way.to brush it but the way it had been cut.
It would disarrange and-muss but it had to fall that way and the
color was the same as Catherine's. He went to the door and
looked at her on the bed. Then he came back and picked up her
big hand mirror. .
"So that's how it is," he said to himself. "You've ,done that to
your hair and had it cut the same as your girl's and how do you
feel?" He asked the mirror. "How do you feel?· Say it."
''You like it," he said.
He looked' at the mirror and it was someone else he saw but it
was less strange now.
"All right. You like it," he said. "Now go through mth the rest
of it whatever it is and don't ever say anyone tempted you or that
anyone bitched you."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
He looked at face that was no longer strange to him at all
but was his face now and said, ''You like it. Remember dlat.
Keep that straight. You know exactly how you look now and haw
you are."
Of course he did not know exactly how he was. But he made
an effort aided by what he had seen in the mirror.
They ate dinner on the terrace in front of the long house
that night and were very excited and quiet and enjoyed looking
at each other in the shaded light on the table. After dinner
Catherine said to the boy who had brought their coffee, "Find
the pail for the champagne in our rOom and ice a new bottIe
"Do we want another?" David asked. '
"I think so. Don't you?"
"Sure."
''You don't have to."
-"Do you want afme?"
"No. I'd rather drink the mne. Do you have to work tomorrow?"
'We'll see."
"Please work if you feel like it."
"And tonight?"
"We'll see about tonight. It's been such an arduous day."
In the night it was very dark and the mnd had risen and they
CQuld hear it in the pines.
"David?"
''Yes.''
"How are you girl?"
"I'm fine." 
Ernest Hemingway
"Let me feel your hair girl. Who cut it? Was it Jean? It's cut so
full and has so much body and it's the same as mine: Let me kiss
you' girl. Oh you have lovely lips. Shut yo~r eyes girl."
He did not shut his eyes but it was dark in the room and outside the wind was high in the trees.
"You know it isn't so easy to be a girl if you're really one. If you really feel things."
"I know."
"Nobody knows. I tell you so when you're my girl. It's not that
you're insatiable. I'm satiable so easily. It's just some feel and
others don't. People lie about it I think. But it's so nice just to feel and hold you. I'm so happy. Just be my girl and love me the
way 1 love you. Love me more. The way you can now. You noW.
Yes you. Please you."
They were dropping down the slope toward Cannes and the
wind was heavy as they came onto the plain and skirted the deserted beaches, the tall grass bending and flattening as they
crossed the bridge over the river and picked up speed oil the last
stretch of fast road before the town. David 'fou~d the bottle,
which was cold and wrapped in a towel, and took a long drink
and felt the car leave the work behind and move away and up the small rise the black road was making. He had not worked
this morning and now when she had driven them through the
town and back into the country, he uncorked the bottle and
drank again and offered it to her.
"I don't need it," Catherine said. "I feel too good."
"Very well."
They passed Golfe-Juan with the good bistro and the small
open bar and then were through the pine woods and movingaIong
the raw yellow beach of Juan-Ies-Pins. They ~rossed the small
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
peninsula on the fast black road and passed through Antibes
driving beside the railway and then out through the town and
beyond the port and the square to~er of the old defenses .and
came out again into open country. "It' never lasts," she said. "ralways eat that stretch too fast."
They stopped and ate lunch in the lee of an old stone wall that
was part of the ruin.of some building hard by the s,ide of a clear
stream that came out €If the mountains and crossed the wild
plain on its way to the sea. The wind came hard out of a funnel
in the mountains. They had spread a blanket on the ground and
they sat close together against the wall and iooked out across
the waste country to the sea that was'-flat and scoured by the
'wind.
"It wasn't much of a place to come to," Catherine said. "1
don't know what I thought it would be like."
They stood up and looked up at the hills with their poised villages and the gray and purple mountains behind. The wind
whipped in their hair and Catherine pointed out a road that she
had once driven into the high country.
"We could have gone somewhere up in there," she said. "But
it's so closed in and picturesque. I hate those hanging villages·," ''This is a good pbce,:' David said. '''It's a fine stream and we
couldn't have a better wall."
''You're. being nice. You don't'have to he."
"It's a good lee and I like the place. We'll tum our back on ail
the picturesque."
They ate stuffed eggs, roast chicken, pickles, fresh long bread
that they broke in pieces and spread Sovora mustard on and
they drank rosEL
':Do YOll feel good now?" Catherine asked.
"Sure."
"And you haven't felt bad?" 
88 Ernest Hemingway
"No."
"Not even about anything I said?"
David took a drink of the wine and said,' "No. I haven't
thought about it."
She stood up and looked into the wind so that it blew her
sweater against her breasts and whipped her hair and then she
looked down at him with her black brown-face and smiled. She
turned around then and looked out toward the sea that was flattened and wrinkled by the wind.
"Let's go get the papers in Cannes and read them in the cafe,"
she said.
''You want to show off."
"Why shouldn't I? It's the first time we've been out together.
Do you mind if we do?"
"No, Devil. Why would I?"
"I didn't want to if you didn't,"
''You said you wanted to."
"I want to do what you want. I can't be more compliant than
that can I?"
"Nobody wants you to be compliant."
"Can we stop it? All I wanted to be was good today. Why spoil
everything?"
"Let's clean up and go."
''Where?''
"Anywhere. The god damn cafe."
They bought the papers in Cannes and a new French Vogue,
the Chasseur Fram;ais and the Miroir des Sports and sat at a
table in front of the cafe out of the wind and read and had their
drinks' and were friends again. David drank Haig bottle
and Perrier and Catherine had Armagnac and Perrier.
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
Two girls who had driven up and parked on the street came
over to the cafe and sat down and ordered a Chambery Cassis
and afme a l'eau. It was the beauty of the two who took the
brandy and soda.
"Who are those two?" Catherine said. "Do you know?"
"I've never seen them."
"I have. They must live around here somewhere. I saw them
in Nice."
"The one girl's handsome," David said. "She has fine legs too,"
sisters," Catherine said. 'They're both nice looking
really." I
"But the one's a beauty. They're not Americans." ,
The two girls were arguing and Catherine said to David, "It's
a big row, I think."
"How did you know they were sisterS?"
"I thought they were in Nice. Now I'm not sure. The car has
Swiss plates."
"It's an old Isotta."
"Should we wait and see what happens? We haven't seen any
drama for a long time."
"I think it's just a big Italian row."
-"It must be getting serious because it's quieter."
"It will flare up. The one is a damned handsome girl."
"Yes, she is. And here·she comes over."
David stood up.
"I'm sorry," the girl said in English. "Please forgive me. Please
, sit down," she said to David.
"Will you sit down?" Catherine asked.
"I shouldn't, My friend is furious with me. But I told het you
understand. You will forgive me?"
"Should we forgive her?" Catherine said to David.
"Let's forgive her." 
go Ernest Hemingway
"I knew you would understand," the girl said. "It's only to teII
me where you had your hair cut." She blushed. "Or is it like
copying a dress? My mend said it was more offensive."
"I'll write it down for you," Catherine said.
"I'm very ashamed," the girl said. "You're not offended?"
"Of course not," Catherine said. 'Would YOll have a drink
with us?"
"I shouldn't. May I ask my friend?"
She went back to her table for a moment and there was a
short and vicious low-pitched exchange.
"My friend regrets very much but she cannot come over," the
girl said. "But I hope we will meet again. You have been so very
kind,"
"How about that?" Catherine said when the girl had gone
back to her friend. "For on a windy day."
"She'll be back to ask where you had your slacks cut."
The row was still going on at the other table. Then the two of
them stood up and came over.
"May I present my friend the-"
"I am Nina."
"Our name is Bourne," David said. uHow very pleasant of you
to join us."
''You were very nice to Jet us come over," the handsome one
said. "It was an impudent thing to do." She blushed.
"It's very flattering," Catherine said. "But he's a very good
coiffeur."
"He must be," the handsome one said. She had a breathless
way of speaking and she blushed again. "We saw you in Nice,"
she said to Catherine. "I wanted to speak to you then. 1 mean
ask you."
She can't blush again, David thought. But she did.
"Who's going to have their hair cut'?" Catherine asked.
"1 am," the handsome one.said.
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
"I am too, stupid," Nina said.
''You said you weren't."
"I changed my mind."
91
"} really am," the handsome one said. "We must go now. 00
you come here to this cafe?"
"Sometimes," Catherine said.
"I hope we'll see you sometime then," the handsome one said.
"Goodbye and thank you for being so gracious." _
The two girls went to their table and Nina caIIed the waiter
and they paid and were gone.
'They're not Italian," David said. 'The one is nice but she
could make you nervous blushing."
"She's in love with you."
"Sure. She saw me in Nice."
"Well I can't heIp it if she is with me:lt isn't the first girl that
ever was and a lot of good it did them."
"How about Nina?"
'That bitch," Catherine said.
"She was a wolf. I suppose it should be amusing."
"I didn't think it was amusing," Catherine said. "I thought it
was sad."
"So did I."
"We'll find another cafe," she said. 'They're gone now any·
, ·.way."
'They were spooky."
"I know," she said. "For me too. But the one girl was nice. She
had beautiful eyes. Did you
"She was an awful blusher though."
"I liked her. Didn't you?"
"I suppose so."
"People that can't blush are worthless."
"Nina blushed once," David said.
could be awfully rude to Nina." 
92 Ernest Hemingway
"It wouldn't touch her."
"No. She's well annored,'"
"Do you want another drink before we go home?"
"I don't need one. But you have one."
"I don't need one."
"Have another. You usually have two in the evening. I'll take a
small one to keep company."
"No. Let's go home."
In the night he woke and heard the wind high and wild and
turned and pulled the sheet over his shoulder and shut his eyes again. He felt her breathing and shut his eyes again. He felt her
breathing softly and regularly and then he went back to sleep.
Chapter Eleven
IT WAS lHE SECOND DAY of the wind and "it had not slackened. He
left the ongoing narrative of their journey where it was to write
a story that had come to him four or five days befo~ and had
been developing, probably, he thought, in the last two nights while he had slept. He knew it was ,bad to interrupt any work he
was engaged in but he felt confident and sure of how well he
was going and he thought he could leave the longer narrative
and write the story which he believed he must write now or lose.
The story started with no difficulty as a story does when it is
ready to be written and he got past the middle of it and knew he
should break off and leave it until the next day. If he could not
keep away from it after he had taken a break he would, drive
through and finish it. But he hoped he could keep' away from it
and hit it fresh the next day. It was a good story and now he re~
membered how long he had intended to write it. The story had
not come to him in the past few days. His memory had been
inaccurate in that. It was the necessity_to write it that had come
to him. He knew how the story ended now. He had always' 
94 Ernest Hemingway
known the wind and sand-scoured bones but they were gone
now and he was inventing all of it. It was aU true now because it
happened to him as he wrote and only its bones were dead and
·scattered and behind him. It started now with the evil in the
shamba and he had to write it and he was very well into it.
He was tired and happy-" from his work when he found
Catherine's note that she had not wanted to disturb him, had
gone Qut and would be back for lunch. He left the room and ordered breakfast and, as he waited for it, Monsieur Aurol, the
proprietor, came in and they spoke about, the weather. Monsieur Aurol said the wind came this way sometimes. It was not a
true mistral, the season guaranteed that, but it would probably blow for three days. The weather was insane now. Monsieur had
undoubtedly noticed that. If anyone kept track of it they would
know that it had not been normal since the war.
David said he had not been able to keep track of it because he
had been travelling but there was no doubt that the weather was
strange. Not only the weather, said Monsieur Aurol, everything
was changed and what was not changed was changing fast. It
might very well all be for the best and he, for one, did not oppose it. Monsieur, as a man of the world, probably saw it in the same
way.
Undoubtedly, said David, seeking for a decisive and terminal
idiocy, it was n'ecessary to'review the cadres.
Precisely, said Monsieur Aurol.
They left it at that and David finished his cafe creme and read
the Miroirdes Spons and began to miss Catherine. He went into
the room and found Far Away and Long Ago and came out onto
the terrace and settled himself in the sun by the table out of the
wind to read the lovely book. Catherine had sent to Galignani's in Paris for the Dent edition for a present for him and when the
books had c.ome they had made him feel truly rich. The figures in his bank balances, the franc and doUar accounts, had, ever since
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 95
Grau du Roi, seemed completely unreal and he had never con·
sidered them as actual money. But the books ofW. H. Hudson
had made him feel rich and when he told Catherine this she was
very pleased.
After he had read an hour he started to miss Catherine very badly and he found the boy who served at table and asked him
to bring a whiskey and Perrier. Later he had another. It was weII
past lunch when he heard the car come up the hill.
They came along the walk and he heard their voices. They
were excited and happy, then the girl was suddenly silent, .and
Catherine said, "Look who I brought to see you."
"Please, I know I should not have come," the girl said. It was
the dark handsome one of the two they had met at the cafe yesterday; the one who blushed.
"How are you?" DaVid said. She had evidently been to the
coiffeur's and her hair had been cropped short the way Cather·
ine's had been at Biarritz. <!I see you found 'the place."
The girl blushed 8J:)d looked at Catherine for courage.
"Look at her," Catherine said. "Go muss her head up."
"Oh Catherine," the girl said. 'Then she said to David, "You'
can if you want."
"Don't be frightened," he said. "What do you think you've gO.t
into?"
"I don't know," she said. "I'm just so happy to be here."
"\Vhere have you two been?" David asked Catherine.
"Jean's of course. Then we just stopped and had a drink and r
asked Marita. if she'd come to lunch. Aren't you glad to see us,?"
"I'm delighted. Will you have another drink?"
'WQuld you make martinis?" Catherine asked. "One won't
hurt you," she said to the girl.
"No please. I have to drive."
"Do you want a sherry?"
"No please." 
Ernest Hemi-ngway
David went behind the bar and found glasses and some ice
and made two martinis.
"I'll taste yours if I may," the girl said to him.
"You're not afraid of him noW are you?" Catherine asked her.
"Not at all," the girl said. She blushed again: "It tastes very
good but terribly strong."
''They are strong," David said. "But there's a strong wind today and we ·drink according to the wind."
"Oh," said the girl. "Do all Americans do that?"
"Only the oldest families," Catherine said. "Us, the Morgans,
the Woolworths, the Jelkses, theJukeses. You know."
"It's rugged in the blizzards and lin hurricane months," David
said. "Sometimes I wonder if we'll get through the autumnal
equinox."
"I'd like to have one sometime when I didn't have to drive,"
the girl said.
''You don't have to drink because we do," Catherine said.
"And don't mind that we make jokes all the time. Look at her
David. Aren't you glad I brought her?"
"I love it that you make jokes," the giiI said. ''You must forgive
me that I'm so happy to be here."
"You were nice to come," David said.
When they were at lunch in the dining room .out of the wind,
David asked, ''What about your friend Nina?"
"She's gone away."
"She was handsome," David said.
"Yes. We had a very big fight and she went away."
"She was a bitch," Catherine said. "But then I think almost
everyone is a bitch."
"Usually they-are," the girl said. "I always hope not but they
are. "
"I know plenty of women who aren't bitches," David said.
''Yes. You would," the girl said.
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 97
"Was Nina happy?" Catherine asked.
"I hope she will be happy," the girl said. "Happiness in intelligent people is the rarest thing I know."
''You haven't had such a long time to find out about it."
"If you make mistakes you find out faster," the girl said.
''You've been happy all morning," Catherine said. 'We had a
wonderful time."
'You don't _need to tell .me," the girl said. "And I'm happier
now than I can remember ever."
Later, over salad David asked the girl, "Are you staying far
from here along the coast?"
"I don't think I'm staying."
"ReaIIy? That's too bad," he said and felt the tension come to
the table and ·draw taut as a hawser. He looked from the girl with
her eyelashes down so they touched her cheeks to Catherine
and she looked at him very straight and said, "She was going
back to Paris and I said why not stay here if Aural has a room?
Come on up to lunch and see if David likes you and if you like
the place. David do you like her?"
"It's not a dub," David said. "It's a hotel." Catherine looked
away and he moved fast to help her, going on as though it had
not been stated. 'We like YOil very much and I'm sure Aural has
'; . room. He should be delighted to have someone else here."
The girl sat at the table with her eyes down. "I think I'd better
-not."
"Please stay a few days," Catherine said. "David and I would
: . both love to have you. I've no one here to keep me company
. while he works. We'd have good times the way we did this mom-
-: jng. Tell her David."
The hell with her, David thought. Fuck her.
"Don't be silly," he said. "Call Monsieur Aural please," he told
.: the boy who served. 'We'll find out about a room,."
"You won't mind truly?" the girl asked. 
=
Ernest Hemingway
'We wouldn't have asked you if we minded," David said. 'We
like you and you're very decorative." _
"I'll be useful if I can," the girl said. "I hope 111 find out how
to be","
"Be happy the way you were when you came in," David told
her. "That's usefuL"
"I am now," the girl said. "I wish I'd taken the martini now
that I don't have to drive."
''You can have one tonight," Catherine said.
"That will be lovely. Can we go and see the rooms now and get
it over with?"
David had driven her down to retrieve the big old Isotta convertible and her bags from where the car had been parked in.
ITont of the cafe in Cannes.
On the way she said, "Your wife is wonderful and I'm in love
with her."
She was sitting beside him and David did not look to see if she .
blushed.
"I'm in love with her too," he said
"I'm in Jove with you also," she said. "Is that all right?"
He dropped his ann and closed his hand on her shoulder and
she leaned close against him.
'We11 have to see about that," he said.
"I'm glad I'm smaller."
"Smaller than who?"
"Catherine," she said.
"That's a hell of a thing to say," he said.
"I mean I thought you might like someone of my size. Or do .
you only care for tall girls?"
"Catherine's not a tall girl."
"Of course not. I only meant that I was not as tall."
"~es and you're very dark too."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
''Yes. We'll look well together."
"Who will?"
"Catherine and I arid you and I."
'We'll have to."
'''What does that me~?"
99
"I mean we can't escape looking well together can
w7 , if we
. look well and we are together?", .
'We're together now."
"No." He was .driving with only one ha~d on the wheel, leaning back and looking up the road ahead at the junctur~ vvith the
N·l· She had put her hand on him. "We're just riding in the
same car," he said.
"But 1 can feel that you like me."
"Yes. I'm very-reliable that way but it doesn't mean a thing."
"It does mean something."
"Just what it says."
"It's a very nice thing to say," she said and did not say anything
more nOr take her hand away until they had turned at the
Boulevard and pulled up behind the old Isotta Fraschini parked
in front of the cafe under the old trees. Then she had smiled at
-him and got out of the small blue car.
Now, at the hotel in the pines that were still being blown by
the wind, David and Catherine were alone in their room after
she finally came in from settling the girl in the two rooms that
she had taken.
"I think she'll be comfortable," Catherine said. "Of course the
.. best rOOm beside our own is the one at, the far end where you
work."
"And I'm going to keep it," David said. "I'm going damn well
and 1 won't change my work room for an imported bitch!"
'''Why are you being so violent?" Catherine said. "No one
'. asked you to give it up. I just said it was the best. But the two
door to it work out very well."
_. "Who is this girl anyway?" 
,
,
100 .Ernest Hemingway
"Don't be.so violent. She's a nice girl and I like her. I know it
was unforgivable to bring her up without speaking to you and
lim sorry. But i did it and it's done. I thought you'd like to have
someone pleasant and attractive for me to have as a friend to go
around with while you're working." .
"I do if you want someone."
"I didn't want someone. I just ran into someone that I liked
and thought you would like and it would be pleasant for her to
be here for a little while." '
"But who is she?"
"I haven't examined her papers. You interrogate her if you
need to."
'Well, she's decorative at least. But whose girl is she?"
"Don't be rough. She's nobody's."
'TeI! me straight."
"All right. She's in love with us both unless I'm crazy."
"You're not crazy."
"Not yet
"So what's the drill?"
"I wouldn't know," Catherine said.
"I wouldn't either."
"It's sort of strange and fun."
"I wouldn't know," David said. "Do you want to go to swim?
We missed it yesterday."
"Let's swim. Should we ask her? It would only be polite."
'We"'d have to wear suits."
'''It wouldn't matter with this wind. It's no day to be on the
sand to tan."
"I hate to wear suits with you."
"Me too. But maybe tomorrow the wind will be over."
Then on the Esterel road with David driving the big old Isotta,
feeling and condemning the too sudden brakes and finding how.
badly the motor needed to be worked over, the three of them sat"
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 101
together and Catherine said, ''There are two or three different
coves where we swim without suits when we're alone. That's the
only way to get really dark."
"It's not a good day to tan," David said. "It's too windy."
'We can swim though without suits if you like," Catherine
said to the girl. "If David doesn't mind. It might be fun."
"I'd love to," the giri said. "Do you mind?" she asked David.
In the evening David made martinis and the girl said, "Is
everything always as wonderful as it has been today?"
"It's been a pleasant day," David said. had not-yet
come out from their room and he and the girl were sitting in
front of the small bar M. Aurol had installed the previous win.
ter in the comer of the big Provent;:aI room.
''When I drink I want to say things I should never say," the girl
said.
"Then don't say them."
"Then what's the use of drinking?"
.'''It isn't these. You've only had one."
'Were you embarrassed when we swam?"
"No. Should r have been?"
"N"h 0, s e sal. ·d"JJ ove d to see you."
'That's good," he said. "How's the martini?"
"It's very strong but I like it. -Did you and Catherine never
swim before like that with anyone?"
"No. Why should we?"
"I'll get really brown."
"I'm sure you will."
'Would you rather"I was not so deeply brown?"
'trou're a nice color. Get that color all over if you like."
"I thought perhaps you'd like one ofyour"girls lighter than the
" 
rD. Ernest Hemingway
''You~re not my girl."
"I am," she said. "I told you before,"
"You don't blush anymore."
"I got over it when we went bathing. I hope I won't now fo~ a
long time. That's why I said everything-to get over it. That's
why I told you."
''You look nice in that cashmere sweater," -David said.
"Catherine said we'd both wear them. You don't dislike me because I told you?"
"I forget what you told me."
"That I love you."
"Don't talk rot."
"Don't you believe it happens to people like that? The way it
happened to me about you two?"
"You don't fall in love with tw9 people at once."
"You don't know," she said.
"It's rot," he said. "It's just a way of talking."
"It isn't at all. It's true," .
"You just think it is. It's nonsense."
"AIl right," she said. "It's nonsense. But I'm here."
''Yes. You're here," he said. He was watching Cath~rine as she
crossed the room, smiling and happy.
"Hello swimmers," she said. "Oh what a shame. I didn't get to
see Marita have her first martini."
"This is stilI it," the girl said.
"How did it affect her, David?"
"Made her_ talk rot."
'We'll start with a fresh one. Weren't you good to resuscitate
this bar. It's such a sort of tentative bar. We'll get a mirror for it.
A bar's no good without a mirror."
'We can get one tomorrow," the girl said. "I'd like to get it."
"Don't be rich"," Catherine said. 'We'll both get it and then
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
we can all see each other when we talk rot and know how rotty
it is. You can't fool a bar mirror."
"It's when I start-looking quizzical in one that I know I've
lost," David said. -
''You never lose. How can you lose with two girls?" Catherine
said.
"I tried to tell him," the girl said and blushed for the first time
, that evening.
"She's your girl and I'm your girl," Catherine said. "Now stop
being stuffy and be nice to your girls. Don't you like the way they
look? I'm the very fair one you-married."
''You're darker and fairer than the one 1 married."
"So are you and I brought'you a d8:rkgirl for a present~ Don't
you like your present?" • . .
"I like my present very much."
"How do you like your future?"
"I don't know about my future."
"It isn't a dark future is it?" the girl asked.
''Very good," Catherine' said. "She's not only beautiful and
rich and healthy and affectionate. She can make jokes. Aren't
-: 'you pleased with what I brought you?"
"I'd rather be a dark present than a dark future," the girl said.
"S~e did it again," Catherine said. "Give her a kiss D'avid and
_ make her a fair present."
David put his arm around the girl and kissed her and she
to kiss him and turned her head away. Then she was cry-
_: ing -with her head down and both hands holding the bar.
-. "Male a good joke now," David said to Catherine.
"I'm all right," the girl said. "Don't look at me. I'm all right."
Catherine put her arm around her and kissed her and stroked
:' her head. '
"I'll be all right," the girl said. "Please, 1 know I'iI be all right." 
Ernest Hemingway
"I'm so sorry," Catherine
"Let me go please," the girl"said. "I have to go."
'Well," David said when the girl was gone and Catherine had
come back to the bar.
"Yoll don't need to say it," Catherine said. !Tm sorry David."
"She'll be back."
"You don't think it's all a fake now do you?"
"They were real tears if that's what you mean."
"Don't be stupid. You aren't stupid."
"I kissed her very carefully."
"Yes. On the mouth."
'Where did you expect me to kiss her?"
"You were all right. 1 haven't criticized you."
"I'm glad you didn't ask me to kiss her when we were at the
beach."
"I thought of it," Catherine said. 'She laughed and it was like
the old days before, anyone had mixed-in their life. "Did you
think I was going to?"
"I thought you were so I dove in."
"Good thing you did."
They laughed again.
'Well, we've cheered up," Catherine said.
''Thank God," David said. "I love you, pevil, and Ileally I didn't
kiss her to make all that."
"You don't have to tell me," Catherine said. "I saw you. It was -'
a miserable effort."
"I vvish she'd go away."
"Don't be heartless," Catherine said. "And I did encourage"
her."
"I tried not to."
"I egged her on about you. I'll go out and find her."
"No. Wait a little while. She's too sure of herself."
"How can Y9U say that, David? You just broke her all up."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
"I did not."
"Well something did. I'm going to go and get her."
But it wasn't necessary because the girl came back to the bar
wh.ere they were standing"and blushed and said, "I'm sorry." Her
face was washed and she had brushed her hair and she came up
to David and kissed him on the mouth very qUickly and said, "I
like my present. Did someone take my drink?"
"I threw it out," Catherine said. "David will make a new one."
"I hope you still like having two girls," she said. "Because 1 am
yours and I'm going to he Catherine's too."
"I don't go in for girls," Catherine said. It was very-quiet and
her voice did not sound right either to herself or to David.
"Don't you ever?"
never have."
"I can be your girl, if you ever one, and David's too."
"Don't you think that's sort of a vast undertaking?" Catherine
asked.
'That's why I came here," the girl said. "I thought that was
what you wanted."
"I've never had a girl," Catherine said.
"I'm so stupid," the girl said. "I didn't know. Is it true? You're
not making fun of" me?" .
"I'm not making fun of you."
"I don't know how I could be so stupid," the girl said. She
'means mistaken David thought and Catherine thought it too.
!hat night in bed Catherine said, "I never should have 'let you
in for any of it. Not for any part of it."
"I wish we'd never seen her."
"It might have something wors.e. Maybe to go through
with it and get rid of it that way is best."
''You could send her away." 
.06 Ernest Hemingway
"I don't think that's the way to clear it now. Doesn't she do
anything to you?"
"Dh sure."
"1 knew she did. But I love you and all this is nothing. You
know it is too."
"I don't know about it, Devil."
"Well we won't be solemn. I can already tell it's death if you're
solemn."
Chapter Twelve
IT WA'S TIlE THIRD DAY of the wind but it"was not as heavy now
and he sat at the ,table and read the story over from the start to
where he had left off, correcting as he read. He went on with the
story, living in it and nowhere else, and when he heard the
voices of the two girls outside he did not listen. When they went
" ,by the window he lifted his 'hand and waved. ThE;Y waved and
the dark girl smiled and Catherine put her fingers to lips.
The girl looked very pretty in the morning, her face shining and
, - her color high. Catherine was beautiful as always. He heard the
. car start and noted it was the Bugatti. He went back into the
, story. It was a good story and he finished it shortly before noon.
It was too late to have breakfast and he was tired after wark-
','ing and did not want to drive the old lSotta into town with its
brakes and huge malfunctioning motor -although the key
with a note Catherine had left saying they had gone to Nice
would look in at the cafe for him on their way home.
What I would like, he thought, is a tall cold liter of beer in a
heavy glass and a pomme a l'huile with coarse ground 
j':
<oS Ernest Hemingway
peppercorns on it. But the beer on this coast was worthless
and he thought happily of Paris and places he had been
and was pleased he had written something he knew was
good and that he had finished it. This was the first writing he
had finished since they were married. Finishing is what you
have to do, he thought. If you don't finish, nothing is worth a
damn. Tomorrow I'll pick up the narrative where I left it and
keep right on until I finish it. And how are yOll going to finish
it? How are you going to finish it now?
As soon as he started to think beyond his work, everything
that he had locked out by the work came back to him. He
thought of the night before and of Catherine and the girl today
on the road that he. and Catherine had driven two days before
and he felt sick. They should be on the way back no'w. It's
noon. Maybe they're at the cafe. Don't be solemn, she had said.
But she meant something else too.-Maybe she knows what she's
doing. Maybe she knows how it can tum out. Maybe she does
know. You don't.
So you worked and now you worry. You'd better write another
story. Write the hardest one there is to write that you know. Go
ahead and do that. You have to last yourself if you're to be any
good to her. What good have you been to her? Plenty, he said.
No, not plenty. Plenty means enough. Go ahead and start the
new one tomorrow. The hell with tomorrow. What a way to be.
Tomorrow. Go In and start it now.
He put the note and the key in his pocket and went back into
the work room and sat down and wrote the first paragraph of the
new story that he had always put off writing since he had known
what a story was. He wrote it in simple declarative sentences
with all of the problems ahead to be lived through and made to
come alive. The very beginning was written and all he had to do
was go on. That's all, he said. You see how simple what you
not do is? Then he came out onto the terrace and sat down and -
ordered a whiskey and Perrier.
THE GARDEN OF. EDEN 109
The proprietor's young nephew brought the bottles and ice
and a glass from the bar and said, "Monsieur had no breakfast." .
"I worked too long." -
flC'est domm.age, " the boy said. "Can I bring anything? A sand.
wich?" '-
"IiI our storeroom you will find a tin of Maquereau Vin Blanc
Capitaine Cook. Open up and bring me two on a plate."
''They won't be cold."
"It makes no difference. Bring them."
He sat and ate the maquereau vin blanc and drank the
whiskey and mineral water. It did make a difference that they
not cold. He read the morning paper while he ate ..
We always ate fresh fish at Ie Grau du Roi, he thought, but
that was a long time ago. He started to remember Grau du Roi
and then he heard the car coming up the hill.
"Take this away," he said to the boy and he stood up and
walked into the bar and poured himself a whiskey, put ice in it
-, and 'filled the glass with Perrier. The of the wine-spiced
fish was in his mouth and he picked up the bottle of mineral wa.
ter and drank from it.
He heard their voices and then they came in the door as
and gay as He saw Catherine's birch bright·
and her dark face loving and excited and the other girl
d."k,th" wiind still in her hair, her eyes very bright and then
shy again as she came clo·ser.
'We didn't stop when we saw you 'weren't at the cafe,"
,'Galtheline said.
"I worked late. How YOll, Devil?"
"I'm very well. Don't ask me how this one is."
you work well, David?" the girl asked. _
':, ''That's being a good wife," Catherine said. "I forgot to
-- ''What did you do in Nice?"
'c, "Can we have a drink and then teIl?"
were close to him on each -side he felt them .. 
no Ernest Hemingway
"Did you work well, David?" she asked again.
"Of course he did," Catherine said. "That's the only way he
ever works, stup.id."
"Did you, David?"
"Yes," he said and rumpled her head. "Thanks."
"Don't we get a drink?" Catherine asked. 'We didn't work at all.
. Wejust bought things and ordered things'and made scandal."
'We didn't make any real scandal."
"I don't know," Catherine said. "I don't care either."
''\iVhat was the scandal?" David asked.
"It wasn't anything," the girl said.
"I didn't mind it," Catherine said. "I liked it."
"Someone said something about her slacks in Nice."
"That's not a scandal," David said. "It's a big town. You had to
expect that if you went there."
"Do I look any Catherine asked. "I wish they'd
brought the mirror. Do 1 look any different to you?"
"No." David looked at her. She looked very blond and disheveled' and darker ever and very excited and defiant.
''That's good," she said. "Because I tried it."
"You didn't do anything," the girl said.
"I did and I Hked it and I want another drink."
"She didn't do anything, David," the girl sa,id.
"This morning I stopped the car on the long clear stretch and
kissed her and she kissed me and on the way back from Nice too
and when we got out of the car just now." .Catherine looked at
him lovingly but rebelliously and then said, "It was fun and I
liked it. You kiss her too. The boy's not here."
David turned to the girl and she clung to him suddenly and
they' kissed. He had not meant to kiss her and he had not known
it would be like this when he did it.
''That's enough," Catherine said.
"How are you?" David said to the girl. She was shy and happy
again.
THE GARDEN OF EDEN III
"I'm happy the way you said to be," the girl told him.
"Everybody is happy now," Catherine said. 'We've shared all
the guilt."
The; had a very good lunch and drank cold Tavel through the
d oeuvres, the poulet and the ratatouille, the salad and the
frUIt and cheese. They were all hungry and they made jokes and
no one was solemn .
"There's a tenific surprise for dinner or before" Cathe ' 'd "Sh d ' nne -sal. e spen s money like'a drunken oil-lease Indian Da 'd" "Arh''>'' ,VI. e t ey nIce. the girl asked. "Or are they like Maharajas'>"
::David will tell you about them. He comes from Oklahoma>
1 thought he came from East Africa." .
_ . "No. Some 0: his ancestors escaped from Oklahoma and took
to East Africa when he was very young."
It must have been very exciting,"
"H
boy."
e wrote a novel about being in East Africa when he was a
"I know."
"You read it?" David asked her.
"I did," she said. "Do you want to ask me abo t't'" "N "h 'd'" u I. 0, e sal . I m familiar with it."
"It made me cry," the girl said. 'Was that your father in it'>"
"Some ways." .
"You must have loved him very much."
"[did."
;'You never talked to me about him," Catherine said.
'You never asked me."
"Would you have?"
"No," he said.
"I loved the book," the girl said.
"D on ' t Overreac h" , Catherine said.
"I wasn't."
"When you kissed
"You asked me to." 
II2 Ernest Hemingway
"W'hat I wanted to say when you interrupted," Catherine
said, "was did you think of him as a writer when you kissed him
and liked it so much?"
David poured a glass of Tavel and drank some of it.
"I don't know," the girl said. "I didn't think."
"I'm glad," Catherine said. "I was afraid it was going to be like
the clippings."
The girl looked really mystified and Catherine explained,
'The press cutting:!! about the second book. He's written two
you know."
"I only The Rift." .
"The second one 'is about flying. In the war. It's the only good
thing anyone ever wrote about flying."
"Balls," David said.
'Wait until you read it," Catherine said. "It's a book you had
to die to write and you had to be completely destroyed. Don't
ever think I don't know about his books just because I don't
think he's a writer when I kiss him."
"I think we ought to take a siesta," David said, ''You ought to
ta,ke a nap, Devil. You're tired."
"I talked too Catherine said. "It was a nice lunch and,
I'm sorry if I talked too much and boasted."
"I loved you when yOu talked abC!ut the books," the girl said,
''You were admirable,"
"I don't feel admirable. I am tired," Catherine said. "Have YOll
plenty to read, Maritat .
"I have two books still," the girl said. "Later I'll borrow some, ,
if I may."
"MaY I come in to 'see you later?"
"If you want," the girl said.
David did not look at the girl and she did not look at him.
"I won't disturb you?',' Catherine said.
"Nothing that I do is important," the said.
THE GARDEN OF EDEN "3
'.
Catherine and David lay side by side on .the bed in their room
with the wind blOwing its last day outside and it was not like
siesta in the old days,
"Can I tell you now?"
"I'd rather skip it."
"No, let me tell. This morning when I started the car i wa,s
frightened and 1 tried to drive very well and I felt hollow
Then I could see Cannes up ahead on the hill and the road was
clear all up ahead by the sea and I looked behind and it was
clear ,and I pulled out from the roa,d into the brus'h. Where it's
like the sagebrush.l kissed her and she kissed me and we sat in
the car and I felt very strange and then we drove into Nice and
I don't know whether people could teI! it or not, I didn't care by
then and we went everywhere and bought,everything, She loves
. to buy things. Someone made a rude remark but it was nothing
really. Then we stopped on the way home and she said it was
better if I was her girl and I said I didn't care either waY'and really I was glad because I am a girl now anyway fl:nd I didn't know
what to do. I never felt so not knOwing ever. But she's nice and
she wanted to help me I think. I don't know. Anyway she was
'. nice and I was driving and she was so pretty and happy and she
was just gentle the way we are sometimes or me to you or either
of us and I said I couldn't drive if she did that 'so we stopped. I
kissed her but I know it happened with me. So we' were
for a while and then I drove straight home. I kissed her be-
:' fore we carrie in and we were happy and I liked it and I still like
';: it."
:" "So now you've done it," David said carefuilYr "and
, through with it."
"But I'm not. I liked it arid I'm going to really do it."
"No. You don't have to." 
"4 Ernest Hemingway
"I do and I'm going to do it until I'm through with it and I'm
over it."
"Who says you'll be over it?"
"I do. But I really have to, David. I didn't know I'd ever be like
this."
He did not say anything.
"I'll be back," she said. "I know I'll get over- it as well as I know
anything. Please trust me,"
He did not say anything.
"She's waiting for me. Didn't you hear me ask her? It's like
stopping in the middle of anything."
"I'm going up to Paris," David said. "You can reach me
through the bank."
"No," she said. "No. You have to help me."
"lean't help you." ..
"You can. You can't go away. I couldn't stand it if you went
away. I don't want to be with her. It's only something that I have
to do. Can't you understand? Please understand. You always understand."
"Not this part."
"Please try. You always understood before. You kn?W you did.
Everything. Didn't you?"
''Yes. Before."
"It started v.rith us and there'll only be us when I get this
ished. I'm not in love v.rith anyone else."
"Don't do it."
"I have to. Ever since 1 went to school all I ever had was
chances to do it and people wanting to do it v.rith me. And I
never would and never did. But now 1 have to."
He said nothing.
"Please know how it is."
He did not say anything.
"Anyway she's in love v.rith you and you can have her and
wash everything away that way."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN "5
"You're talking crazy, Devil."
"I know it," she said. "I'll
"Take a nap," he said. '1ust lie close and quiet and we'll both
go to sleep."
"II ave-you so, "h s e sal "d"And . you ' re my true partner the way
I told her. I've told her too much about- yqu ,but that's' all she
likes to talk about. I'm quiet now so I'm going to go." .
"No. Don't." '
''Yes,'' she said. ''You wait for me. I won't be very long."
%en she came back to the rOom David was not there and
she stood a long time and looked at the bed and then went to the
bathroom door and opened it and stood and looked in the long
mirror. Her face. had no expression 8Jld she looked at herself
from her head down to her with no expression on her face
at all. The light was nearly gone when she went into the bathroom and shut the door behind her. 
[,
,
Chapter Thirteen
DAVlD DROVE UP from Cannes in the dusk. The wind had fallen
and he left the car in the usual place and walked up the path to
where the light-came out onto the patio and the garden. Marita
came out of the doorway and walked toward him.
"Catherine feels terribly," she said. "Please be kind to her."
"The hell with both of YOll," David said.
"With me, yes. But not with her. You mustn't, David."
"Don't tell me what I must and what I mustn't."
"Don't you want to take care of her?"
"Not particularly.".
"I do."
''You certainly have."
"Don't be a fool," she said. ''You're not a fool. I tell you this is
serious."
"Where is she?"
"In there waiting for you."
David went in the door. Catherine was sitting at· the empty
bar. -
THE GARDE.N OF EDEN
"Hello," she said. "They didn't bring the mirror."
"Hello, Devil," he said. "I'm sorry I was late.'"
He was shocked at the dead way looked and at her toneless voice. ' .
"I thought you'd gone away," she said.
"Didn't you see I hadn't taken anything?"
"I didn't look. You wouldn't need to take anything to go away."
"No," David said. "I just went into town."
"Oh," she said and looked at the wail.
''The wind's dropping," he said. "It will be a good day tomorrow."
"I don't care about tomorrow."
"5 ure you d " o.
"No I don't. Don't askme to."
"I won't ask you to," he said. (jHaveypu had a drink?"-
"No." .
''J'Il make one,"
"I'd twont oanygood."
"It might. We're still us." He was making the drink and she
watched him mechanically as he stirred and then poured into
the glasses. -
"Put in the garlic olive," she said.
, He handed her one of the glasses and lifted his and touched
- it against hers. "Here's to us."
She poured her glass out on the bar and looked at it flow
'("along the wood. Then she picked up the olive and put it in her
i'nlou"h. 'There isn't any us," she said. "Not anymore."
,_ David took a handkerchief out of his pocket and wiped the
: _ bar and made another drink.
"It's alhhit," Catherine said. David handed her the drink and
looked at it and then poured it on the bar. David mopped it
again and wrung out his handkerchief. Then he drank his
martini and made'two more. 
118 Ern est H.e m in gwa y
''This one you drink," he said. "Just drink it,"
"Just drink," she said. She lifted the glass and said,:'Here's to
you and your god damned handkerchief."
She drank the glass off and· then held it, looking at it, and
David was sure that she was going to throw it in his face. Then
she put it down and picked the garlic 9live out of it and ate
very carefully and handed David the pit.
"Semi-precious stone," she said. "-Put it in your pocket. I'll
have another one if you'll make it,"
"But drink this one
"Oh I'm quite all right now," Catherine said. ''You probably
won't notice the difference. I'm sure it happens to everybody."
"Do you feel better?" .
"Much better really. You just lose something and it's gone
that's all. All we lose was all that we had. But we get some more.
There's no problem is there?"
"Are you hungry?"
"No. But I'm sure everything will be all right. You said it
would didn't you?"
"Of course it will."
"I wish I could remember what it was we.Jost. But it doesn't
matter does it? You said it didn't matter."
"No."
"Then let's be cheerful. It's just gone whatever it was."
"It must have been something we forgot," he said. 'We'll find
it."
"I did something I know. But it's gone now."
"That's good."
"It wasn't anyone else's fault whatever it was."
"Don't talk about faults."
"I know what it was now," she smiled. "But I wasn't
fu!. Really David. How could I be? I couldn't be. You know
How could you say I was? Why did YOll say it?"
THE GARDEN OF EDEN "9
''You weren't."
"Qf course I wasn't. I wish you said it though."
"I didn't say it, Devil." -
"Somebody did. But I wasn't. I just did what I said I'd do.
Where's Marita?"
"She's in her room I think."
"I'm glad I'rp. all right again. Once you took it back I was all
right. I wish it was you had done it so I 'Could take it back about
you. We're us again aren't we? I didn't kill it."
"No."
She again. ''That's good. I'll go and get her. Do you'
mind? She was worried about me. Before you came back."
"She was?"
"I talked a lot," Catherine said. "I always talk too much. She's
awfully nice, David, if YQU knew her. Sl}e was very good to me."
"The hell with her." .
"No. You took all that back. Remember? I don't wanUo have
:all that again. Do you? It's too confusing. Truly."
"All right bring her. She'll be glad to see you're feeling good
again."
"I know she win and you must maJ{e feel good too. ,,'
"Sure. Does she feel badly?"
"Only when I did. When I knew I was unfaithful. I never was
you know. You go and bring her, Daviil Then she won't
bad. No don't bother, I'll go."
Ca,therine went out the door and David watched her go. Her
m')vem,nt" weee I"" mechat:ticaI and her voice was better. When
,sh" caone back she was smiling and her voice was almost natural.
"She's coming in just a minute," she said. "She's lovely, David.
_,' so glad you brought her." .
The girl came in and David said, "We were waiting for you."
She looked at-him and looked away. Then she looked 'back at
,,_. held herself very straight and said, "I'm sorry to be late." 
(.
I
I
,
'" r
,
>20 Ernest Hemingway
''You look very handsome," David said and it was quite true
but she had the saddest eyes he had ever seen.
"Make her a drink please, David. I had twa," Catherine said
to the girl.
"I'm glad you feel better," the girl said.
"David made me feel good again," Catherine said. "I told him
all about everything and how lovely it was and he understands
perfectly. He really approves,"
The girl looked at David and he saw the way her teeth bit her
upper lip and what she said to him with her eyes. "It was dun in
town. I missed the swimming," he said.
''You don't know what you missed," Catherine said. ''You
missed everything. It was what I wanted to do all, my life and
now I've done it and I loved it."
The girl was looking down at her glass.
"The most wonderful thing is that I feel so grown up now. But
it's exhausting. Of course it's what I wanted and now I've done
it and I know I'm just an apprentice but fwon't always be."
"Apprentice allowance, claimed," David said and took 'a
chance then and said very cheerfully, "Don't you ever talk on
any other subjects? PelVersion's dull and old fashioned. I didn't
know people like us even kept up on it."
"I suppose it's only really interesting the first time one does
it," Catherine said.
"And then only to the person who does it and a bloody to
everyone else," David said. "Do you agree, Heiress?"
"Do you call her Heiress?" Catherine asked. 'That's a nice
funny name."
"I can't very well call her Ma'am or Highness.," David said.
"Do you agree, Heiress? About perversion?"
"I always thought it was overrated and silly," she said. "It's
only something girls do because they have nothing
"But one's first time at anything is interesting," Catherine
said.
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
"Yes," David said. "But would you want to always talk about
your first ride at Steeplechase Park or how you, yourself, per-
.sonally soloed all by yourself in a plane absolutely away
from the earth and up in the sky?"
"I'm ashamed," Catherine said. "Look at me and see if I'm not
ashamed.';
David put his arm around her.
"Don't be he said. ''Just remember how you'd like
to hear old Heiress here recall how she went up in that plane,
just and the plane, and there was nothing between her
and the earth, imagine the Earth, with a bigE, butjustherplane
and they might have been and smashed to horrible bits
both of them and she lose her money and her health and her
sanity and her life with a capital L and her loved ones or me or
,'. you or Jesus, all with capital letters, if she "crashed"-put the
. word crashed in quotes." e
"Did you ever solo, Heiress?"
"No," the girl said. "I don't have to But I would like an-
'.' other drink. 1 love you, David."
"Kiss her again the way you did before," Catherine said.
"Sometime," David said. "I'm making drinks."
uI'm so glad we're all friends again and everything is fine,"
Catherine said. She was very animated now and her voice was
nan,ral and almost relaxed. .
"I forgot about the surprise that Heiress bought this morning.
go and get it." .
When Catherine was gone, the girl· took David's hand and
it very tight and then kissed it. They sat and looked at each
She touched hand her-fingers almost absentlincledlly. She curled her fingers around his and then released
"We don't need to talk," she said. ''You don't want me to
a speech do you?"
. "No. But we have to talk
.. ; ',Would you like me to go away?" 
,
,
,
122 Ernest H.emingway
''You 'db e smarter to go away. "
'Would you kiss me so I know that it is all right if I stay?"
Catherine. had come in now with the young waiter who carried a large tin of caviar in a bowl of ice on a tray with a plate of
toast. 'That was a wonderful kiss," she said. "Everyone saw it so
there's no longer any fear of scandal or anything," Catherine
said. 'They're cutting up some egg whites. and some onion."
It was very large finn gray caviar and Catherine'dipped it onto
the pieces of thin toast.
"Heiress bought you a case of Bollinger Brut 1915 and there is
some iced. Don't you think. we should drink a bottle with this?"
"Sure," said David. "Let's-have it all through the meal."
"Isn't it lucky Heiress and I are rich so you'll never have anything to worry We'll take goo_d care of him won't we
Heiress?"
'We must try very hard," the girl said. "I'm trying to study his
needs. This was all we could find for today."
Chapter Fourteen
HE HAD SLEPT about two hou"rs when the daylight woke him and
he looked at Catherine sleeping easily and looking happy in her
sleep. He left her looking beautiful and young and unspoiled
:- and then went into the bathroom and showered and put on a
pair of shorts and walked barefoot through the garden to the
where he worked. The sky was washed, clean after the
and it was the fresh early morning of a. new day toward
'th" ",d of summer.
He started in ,again on the new and difficult story and worked
thing thai: for years he had put off facing. He
\} nearly eleven o'clock and when he had finished for
day he shut up the room and went out and found the two .
playing chess at a table in the They both looked
,m"n,",1C young and as attractive as the morning
beating me again," Catherine said. "How are you,
The girl smiled at him very shyly. 
i
,
124 Ernest Hemingway
They are the two loveliest girls I've ever seen, David thought.
Now what will this day bring. "How are you two?" he said.
'We're very well," the girl.said. -"Did you have good luck?"
"It's all uphill but it's going well," he said.
''You had any breakfast."
"It's too late for breakfast," David said.
"Nonsense," Catherine. saId. ''You're wife of the day, Heiress.
Make him eat breakfast."
"Wouldn't you like coffee and some fruit, David?" the girl
asked. ''You ought to eat something."
"I'll have some black coffee," David said.
"I'll bring you something," the girl said and went off into the
hotel.
David sat by Catherine at the table and she put the chessmen
and the hoard on a chair. She mussed his hair and said, "Have
you forgotten you have a silver head like mine?"
''Yes,'' he said.
"It's going to be lighter and lighter and I'll be fairer and fairer
and darker in the body too."
''That will be wonderful."
''Yes and I'm all over everything."
The pretty dark girl was bringing a' tray with a small bowl .
rounded with caviar, a half lemon, a spoon and two pieces
toast and the young waiter had a bucket with a bottle of the .:
Bollinger and a tray with three glasses. -
"This will be good for David," the girl said. "Then we can go -
swimming before lunch."
After the swimming and lying in the sun on the beach
big long lUhch with more of the Bollinger, Catherine said,
really tired and sleepy."
''You swam a long way," David said. 'We'll make a siesta."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
"I want to really sleep," Catherine said.
"Do you feel wen, the girl asked.
''Yes. Just deadly sleepy.'.'
125
''.We'll put you to bed," David said. "Do you have a. thermometer?" he asked the girl.
''I'm sure I haven't any fever," Catherine said. "I just want to
sleep for a long time."
When she was in bed the girl brought in the thennometer and
David took Catherine's temperature and. her pulse. The temperature was nonnal and the pulse WaS one hundred ahd five.
''The_pulse is a little high," he said. "But 1 don't know your
normal pulse."
"I don't either but it's probably. too fast."
"I don't think the pulse means much with the temperature
nonnal," David said. "But if you have a fever I'lll;lring a doctor
up from Cannes."
"I don't want a doctor," Catherine said. "I just want to sleep.
Can I sleep now?"
''Yes, my beauty. You call if you want me."
They stood and watched her go to sle.ep and then went out
very qUietly and David walked along ,the stones and looked
-,-' through the window. Catherine was sleeping qUietly and her
-breathing was regular. He brought two chairs tip and a table and
they sat in the shade near Catherine's window imd looked out'
'" through the pines to the blue sea. "What do you think?" David
asked. .
"I don't know. She was happy this morning. Just as you saw
:.: her when you finished writing."
"What about now?"
"Maybe just a reaction from yesterday. She's a very natural
David, and this is-n'atural."
"Yesterday was like lOving someone when someone's died," he
"It wasn't right." He stood UP' and walked to the window 
126 EFnest Hemingway
and looked in. Catherine was sleeping in the same position and
breathing lightly. "She's sieeping well," he told the girl. "Wouldn't
you like to take a nap?"
"I think so."
"I'm going down to my room where I work," he said. "There's a
door to yours that bolts on each side." He walked down along the
stones and unlocked thedoorofhis room and then unbolted the
door between the two rooms. He stood and waited and then
heard the bolt turn on the other side of the door and then the
door opened. Theysat side by side on the bed and he put his arm
around her. "Kiss me," David said.
"I love to kiss you," she said; "I love it so very much. But I can't
do the other."
"No?"
"No, I can't."
Then she said, "Isn't there anything I can do foryoll now? I'm
so ashamed about the other but you know how it could make
trouble."
"Jus~ lie here by me."
''I'd love that."
"Do what you like." .
"I will," she said. "You too please. Do what we can."
Catherine slept all through the afternoon and early evening. David and the girl were sitting at the bar having a drink together : and the girl said, ''They never did bring the mirror."
"Did you ask old man Aurol about it?"
''Yes. He was pleased." .
"I'd better pay him corkage on that Bollinger or something." .
"I gave him four bottles and two very good bottles affine. He's" .
taken care of. It was Madame I was afraid of about trouble."
''You were absolutely right." .
THE GAR DEN 0 FED E N 127
"I don't want to make trouble, David."
"No," he said. "I don't think you do."
The young waiter had come in with more ice and David made
two martinis and gave her one. The waiter put in the garlic olives and then went back to the kitchen.
"I'll go and see how Catherine is," the girl said. ''Things will
turn out or they won't."
She was gone for about ten minutes and he felt of the girl's "drink and decided to drink it before it got warm. He took it in his
hand and raised it to his lips and he found as it touched his lips that it gave him pleasure because it was hers. It was clear"and
undeniable. That's all you need, he thought. That's all you need
to make things really perfect. Be in Jove with both of them.
What's happened to you since last May? What are you anymore
anyway? B"ut he touched the glass to his lips again and there was
the same reaction as before. All right, he said, remember to
do the work. The work is what you have left. You better fork up with the work. "
!he girl came back and when he saw her' come in, her face
" happy, he knew how he felt about her.
"She's l' the girl said. "She feels fine. Isn't it
''Yes,'' he said, laving Catherine too as always.
"What happened to my drink?"
-"I drank it," he said. "Because it was yours."
" ''Truly, David?" She blushed and was happy.
''That's as well as I can put it," he said. "Here's a new one."
She tasted it and passed her lips very lightly over the rim f,lnd
passed it to him and he did the same and took a long sip.
very beautiful," he said. "And I lo~e you." 
Chapter Fifteen
HE HEARD THE BUGAlTl start and the noise came as a surprise
and an intrusion because there was no motor noise in the count where he was living. He was completely detached from
IJ' dh 1'" everything except the story he was writing an e was IVlng In ,
it as he built it. The difficult parts he had dreaded he now faced
one after another and as he did the people, the country, the days, '
and the nights, and the weather were all there as he wrote,. He .:
went on working and he felt as tired as ifhe had spent the '.
crossing the broken volcanic desert and the sun had caught hIm "
and the others with the dry gray lakes still ahead. He could feel .
the weight of the heavy double-barreled rifle carned over his ,
shoulder, his hand on the muzzle, and he tasted the pebble in '
his mouth. Across the shimmer of the dry iak'7s he,could see the
distant blue of the escarpment. Ahead of him there was r:ao one, ;,
and behind was the long line of porters who knew that they had'
reached this point three hours too late. . '
It was not him, of course, who had stood there that mommg;
nor had he even worn the patched corduroy jacket faded aIn,o,t
white now, the armpits rotted through by swea,t,
THE GAR DEN 0 FED E N 129
. then and handed to his Kamba servant and brother who shared
with him the gUilt and knowledge of the delay, watching him
smell the sour, vinegary smell and shake his head in disgust and
then grin as he swung the jacket over his black shoulder holding
it by the sleeves as they started off across the dry·baked gray, the
gun muzzles in their right hands, the barrels balanced on their
shoulders, the heavy stocks pOinting back toward the line of
porters.
It was not him, but as he wrote It was and when someone read
it, finally, it would be whoever read it and what they found when
they should" reach the escarpment, if they reached it, he
would make them reach its base by noon of that day; then whoever read it would find what there was there and have it always.
AIl your father found he found for you too, he thought, the
good, the wonderful, the bad, the very bad, the really very bad,
the truly bad and then the much worse: It was a shame a man
with such a talent for disaster and for delight should have gone
way he went, he thought. It always made him happy to rem"mlbe, his father and he knew his father would have liked this
It was nearly noon when he came out, of the room and walked
,bareDoot on the stones of the patio to the entrance of the hotel.
the big room' workmen were putting up a mirror on the wall
the bar. Monsieur Aural and the young waiter were with
and he spoke to them and went out in the kitchen where
found Madame.
" "Have you any beer, Madame?" he asked her.
',,- "Mais certainement, Monsieur Bourne," she said and brought
bottle from the ice che'st.
'''' "I'll drink it from the bottle," he said.
Monsieur Wishes," she said. ''The ladies drove to Nice I
Monsieur worked well?"
''\I'l"VweiL'' 
Erne~t Hemingway
"Monsieur works too hard. It's not good not to take breakfast."
"Is there any of that caviar left in the tin?"
"I'm sure there is."
"I'll take a couple Of spoonsful."
'~Monsieur is odd," Madame said. "Yesterday you ate it with
champagne: Today ",,!th beer."
"I'm alone today," David said. "Do you know if my bicyclette
is still in the remise?"
"It should be," Madame said.
David took a spoonful of the caviar and offered the tin to
M~dame. "Have s"ame, Madame. It's very good." '
"I shouldn't," she said.
"Don't be silly," he told her. ''Take some, There's some toast.
Take a glass of champagne. There's some in the ice box."
Madame took a spoonful of ~aviar and put it on a piece of
toast left from breakfast and poured herself a glass of rose.
"It is excellent," she said. "Now we must put it away."
"Do you feel any good effect?" David asked. "I'm going to
h • ave one more spoon.
"Ah, Monsieur. You mustn't joke'like that."
"Why not?" David said. "My joking partners are away. If thos,e "
two beautiful women come back tell them I went for a swim will,
you?"
"Certainly. The little one is a beauty. Not as beautiful as :.
Madame of course."
"I find her not too ugly," David said.
"She's a beauty, Monsieur, and very charming."
"She'll do until something else comes along," David said. "
you think she's pretty."
"Monsieur," she said in deepest reproof.
'What are'all the architectural reforms?" David asked.
"The new miroir for the bar? It's such a charming gift to
maison."
THE GARDEN OF 'EDEN 131
"Ev,eryone's full of charm," David said. "Charm and sturgeon
eggs. Ask the boy to look at my tires while I put something on my feet and find a cap, will you 'please?" , ,
"Monsieur likes to go barefoot. Me too in summer."
"We'll go barefoot together sometime."
,"Monsieur," she saidgiving it everything.
"Is Aural jealous?'"
"Sf!ns, blague," she said. "I'll tell the two beautiful ladies' you've gone Swimming."
"Keep the caviar away from Aurol," David said. 'A. bient6t, chere Madame,"
"A tout a l'heure, Monsieur."
On the shiny black road that mounted through the pines as he left the hotel he felt the pull in his arms and his shoulders
and the rounding thrust of his feet against the pedals as he 'climbed in the hot sun with the smell of the pines and the light
9reeze that came from the sea. He bent his back forward ahd
" lightly against his hands and felt the cadence that had
: been ragged as he first mounted begin to smooth out as he
, the hundred-meter stones and then the first red-topped
second.At the headland'the road
(clipp"" to border the sea and he braked and dismounted ar}d put 1.the bicyd, over his shoulder and walked down with it along the
the beach. He propped it against a pine tree that gave off th,",,,in smell of the hot day and he dropped down to the rocks,
,stripp"d and put his espadrilles on his shorts. shirt and cap and ihe dove from the rocks into the deep dear cold sea. He came up 'throullh the vaI)1ng light and when his head came out he shook
dear his ears and then swam out to sea. He lay on his back
floated and watched the sky and the first white clouds that
coming with the breeze.
swam back in to the cove finally and climbed up'on the 1"'ll",d roelks and sat there in the sun looking down into the sea. 
Ernest, Hemingway.
He was' happy to be alone and to have finished his work for the
day. Then the loneliness he always had after work started·and he
began to think about the girls and to miss them; to miss the
one nor the other at first, but to miss them both. Then he·
thought of them, not critically, not as any problem of love or
fondness, nor of obligation nor of.what had happened or would
happen,.nor of any problem of conduct now or but simply of how he missed them. He was lonely for them both, alone
and together, and he wanted them both.
Sitting in the sun 'on the -rock looking down into the sea, he
knew it was wrong to' want them both but he did. Nothing with
either of those two can end well and neither can you now, he
told himself. But do not start blaming who you love nor apportioning blame. It will all be apportioned in due time and not by
you.
He looked down into the sea and tried to think clearly what
the situation was and it did not work out. The worst was what
had happened to Catherine. The next worse was that he had begun to care for the other girl. He did not have to examine his
conscience to know that he loved Catherine nor that it was
wrong to love two women and that no good could ever come of .'
it. He did not yet know how terrible it could be. He only knew
that it had started. The three of yO}l are already enmeshed .
three gears that tum a wheel, he told himself and also told himself one gear had been strippeq or, at least, badly damaged. He
dove deep down into the clear cold water where he" missed no
one and then came up and shook his head and swam out further.
and then turned to swim back to the beach.
He dressed, still wet from the sea and put his cap in his
pocket, then climbed up to the road with his bicycle
mounted, driving the machine up the short hill feeling the
of training in his thighs a.s he pressed the balls of his, feet on
pedals -with the steady climbing thrust that carried him up
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 133
black road as though he and the racing bike were some wheeled
animal. Then he coasted his hands fingering the brakes,
taking. the curves fast, dropping down the shiny dark road
through the pines, to the turnoff at the court of the hotel
where the sea shone Summer blue beyond the trees. .
The girls were not back yet and he went into the room and
took a shower, changed to a fresh shirt and shorts and came out
to the bar with its new and handsome mirror. He called the boy
and asked him to bring a lemon, a knife and some ice and
showed him how to make a Tom Collins. Then he $at on the bar
stool and looked into the mirror as he lifted the tall drink. I do
not know if I'd have a drink with you or not if I'd met you four
.' months ago, he thought. The boy brought him the Eclaireur de
" Nice and he read it whilehe waited. He had been disappointed
: to find the girls returned and,he them and began to
.. they came in, finally, Catherine was very gay and exand the girl was contrite and very quiet.
"Hello darling," Catherine said to David. "Oh look at the mirThey did get it up. It's a very good one too. It's awfully critithough. I'll go in and clean up for lunch. I'm sorry we're
"
"We stopped in town and had a drink," the girl said to David.
sorry to have kept you waiting."
"A drink?" David said.
The girl held up two fingers. She put her face up and kissed
and was gone. David went back to reading the paper.
"Vh.,n Catherine came out she was wearing the dark blue
shirt that David liked and slacks and she said, "Darling I
not cross. It wasn't really our fault.- I 'saw Jean and I
him to have a drink with us and he did and was so nice."
coiffeur?" .
Of <:;ourse. What other Jean would I know in Cannes? 
Ernest Hemingway
"He was so nice and he asked about you. Can I have a mar~
tini, darling? I've only had one."
"Lunch must be ready by now.'~
"Just one, darling. They only have us for lunch."
David made two martinis taking his time and the girl came in.
She was wearing a white sharkskin dress and she looked fresh
and cool. "May I have one; too, David? It was a very hot ,day. How
was it here?"
"You should have stayed home and looked after him," Cather~
ine said.
"I got along all right," David said. "The sea was very good" ,
''You use such interesting adjectives," Catherine said. "They'-
make everything so vivid."
"Sorry," David said.
"That's another dandy word," Catherine said. "Explain what
dandy means to your new girl. It's an Americanism."
"I think I know it," the girl said. "It's the third word in 'Yankee :-
Doodle Dandy.' Don't please be cross Catherine."
"I'm not cross," Catherine said. "But two days ago when you
made passes at me it was simply dandy but today if I felt that .,'
way the slightest bit you had to act as though I was an I dori't -
know what."
"I'm sorry, Catherine," the girl said.
"Another sorry sorry," Catherine said. "As though you hadn't
taught me what little I know.';
"Should we have lunch?" David said. "It's been a hot
Devil, and you're tired."
"I'm tired of everyoody," Catherine said._ "Please forgive me." -
"There's nothing to forgive," the girl said. "I'm sorry I
stuffy. I didn't come here to be that .way." She walked over
Catherine and kissed her very gently and lightly. :'Now be a
girl," she said. "Should we go to the table?"
"Didn't we have lunch?" Catherine asked.
THE GARDEN OF EDEN '35
"No, Devil," David said. "\Ak're going to have lunch now."
At the end of lunch Catherine who had made sense through
nearly all of it except for some absentmindedness said, "Please
excuse me but I think I ought to sleep."
::Let me come with you and see you get to sleep," the girl said.
Actually I think I drank too much," Catherine said.
''1'11 come in and take a nap too," David said.
"No please David. Co~e in when I'm asleep if you want,"
Catherine said.
In about half an hour the girl came out of the room "She's all
right," she said. "But we must be careftil and good with her and
only think about her."
. In the room Catherine was awake when David came in and
he went over. and sat on the bed. -
" "I'm not a damned invalid," she said. ~I just drank too much.
·1 know. I'm sorry I lied to you about it. How could I do that
" ' '
''You didn't remember."
"No., I did it on purpose. Will you take me back? I'm over all
bitchiness. "
"You never were away."
"If you take me back is all I want. I'll b,e your really true girl
and re,.llytruly be. Would you like that?" . ' .
'. He kissed her. '
, '-~'Really kiss me. ,;
" she said. "Please be slow."
swam at the cove where they had gone the first day.
had planned to send the two girls to swim and then to
old Isotta down to Cannes to have the brakes fixed and
ignition overhauled. But Catherine had asked him to please
with them and to do~the car the next day and she seemed 
Ernest Hemingway
so happy and sound and cheerful again after her nap and Marita
had said very seriously, ''Will you please come?" So he had driven
them to the- turnout for the cove and shOWI;l them both on the
way how dangerously the brakes were working.
''You'd kill Y9urselfwith this car," he told Marita. "It's a crime
to drive it the way it is."
"H?-d 1 ought to get a new one?" she asked.
"Christ no. Just let me fix the brakes to start with."
'We need a larger car with room for all of us," Catherine said.
"This'is a fine car," David said. "It just needs a hell of a lot of
work done on it. But it's too much car for you."
see if they can fix it properly," the girl said. "If they can't
get the type of car Y9U want."
Then they were tanning on the beach and David said lazily,
"Come in and swim."
. "Pour some water on my head," Catherine said. "I brought a
sand bucket in the rucksack."
"Dh that feels wonderful," she said. "Could I have one more?--
Pour it on my face too."
She lay on the hard beach on her white robe in the sun and
David and-the girl swam out to sea and around the rocks at
m'outh of the cove. The girl was swimming ahead and
overhauled her. He reached out and grabbed a foot and u""".ou
her close in his anns and kissed her as they treaded water.
felt slippery and strange in the water and tliey seemed the
height as they treaded water with th"irbo,jies c1'o", ,<,geth,,, and,
kissed. Then her head went under and he leaned back and
came up laughing and shaking her head that was sleek as a seal,
and she brought her lips against his again and they kissed
they both went under. They lay side by side and floated
touched and then kissed hard and happily and went unde, a"ail'.
"I don't worry about anything now," she said, when theyca,me
up again. "You mustn't either."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN '37
"I won '''h t, e sal 'd an d t h ey swam in.
"You better go in, Devil," said to Catherine. ''Your head will
get too hot." .
"All right. Let's go in," she said. "Let Heiress darken now. Let
me put some oil on her."
"Not too much," the girl said. "May I have a pail of wafer on
my head too?" , .
,"Your head's as wet as"it can get," Catherine said.
"I just wanted to feel it," the girl said.
"Wade out, David, and get a good cold one," Catherine said.
And he had poured the clear cool sea water on Marita's
head they left her lying with her face on her anns and swam out
to sea. They floated easily like sea animals and Catherine said ,
'Wouldn't it be wonderful if I wasn't' crazy?"
''You're not crazy." _
"Not this afternoon," she said. '!Anyway not so far. Can we
swim further?"
-"We're pretty well out, Devil."
"All right. Let's swim back ip. But the deep water's beautiful
out here."
"Do you want to swim down once before we go in?"
'1ust once," she said. "In this very deep part."
'.'We'll swim down until we just can make it up." 
Chapter Sixteen
HE WOKE when it was barely-just light enough to see the pine' ._:
trunks and he left the bed, careful not to wake Catherine, found
his shorts and went, the soles of his feet wet from the dew on
the stones, along the length of the -hotel to the door of his wor.k
roorp.. As he opened the door he felt, again, the touch of the au
from the sea that promised how the day would be.
When he sat down the sun was not yet up and he felt that _
he had made up some of the time that was lost in the story. But _
as he reread his careful legible hand and the words took him
away and into the other country, he lost that advantage and was
faced with the ,same problem and when the rose out of the
sea it had, for him, risen long before and he was well into the
crossing of the gray, dried, bitter lakes his boots .now white wit,h .
crusted alkalis. He felt the weight of the sun on his head and hIS ::
neck and his back. His shirt was wet and he felt the sweat
down his back and between his thighs. When he stood .
up and rested, breathing slowly, and his shirt hung away
THE GAR DEN 0 FED E N '39
his shoulders, he could feel it dry in the sun and see the white
patches that the salts of his body made in the drying. He could
feel and see himself standing there and knew there was nothing
to do except go on.
At half past ten he had crossed the lakes and,was well beyond
.them. By then he had reached the river and the great grove offig
trees where they would make their camp. The bark of the trunks
was green and yellow and the branches were heavy. Baboons
had been eating the wild figs and there were babo0l1 droppings
and broken figs on the ground. The smell was foul.
But the half past ten was on the watch on his wrist as he
looked at it in the room where he sat at a table feeling the breeze
frOm the sea now and the real time was evening and he was sitting against the yellow'gray base of a tree with a glass of whiskey
_. and water in his hand and the rolled figs- swept away watching
, the P?rters butchering out the Kongoni he had shC?t in the first
""'''v ",'ale they passed before they came to the river.
I'II leave them with meat, he thought and so it is a happy
calnp tOloight no matter what comes after.Bo he put his pencils
the notebo.oks away and locked the suitcase and went out
door and walked on the stones, dry and warm now, to the
patio.
The girl was Sitting at one of the tables reading.a book. She,
a striped fishennan's shirt and tennis skirt and espadrilles
when she saw him she looked up and David thought she
to blush but she seemed to check it and said, "Good
inoming, David. Did you work well?"
.. ''Yes, beauty," he said.
She stood up then and' kissed him good morning and said,
['m velY happy then. Catherine went in to Cannes. She said to
you I was to take you swimming.;'
she want you to go in town with he!?" 
,
i·'
Ernest Hemingway
"No. She wanted me to stay. She said you got up terribly early
to work and maybe you'd be lonely when you finished. Can lorder some breakfast? You shouldn't always not eat breakfast."
The girl went into the kitchen and she came Qut with oeufs au
plat avec and English mustard and Sovora.
"Was it difficult today?" she asked him.
"No,"'he said. "It's always difficult but it's easy_too. It went
very well."
"I wish I could help."
"Nobody can help," he said.
"But I can help in other things can't I?"
He started to say there are no other things but he did not say
it and instead he said, ''You have and you do."
He wiped the last of the egg and mustard up from the shallow
dish with a small piece of bread and then drank some tea. "How
did you sleep?" he §lsked.
"Very well," the girl said. "I hope that's not disloyal."
"No. That's intelligent."
"Can we stop being so polite?" the girl asked. "Everything was
so simple and fine until now."
"Yes, let's stop. Let's stop even the 'I can't David' nonsense,"
he said.
,"All right," she said and stood up. "If you want to go swii:nming I'll be in my room."
He stood up. "Please don't go," he said. "I've stopped being a
shit. "
"Don't stop for me," she said. "Oh David how could we ever'
get in a thing like this?' Poor David. 'Nhat women do to you.'''..
She was stroking his head and smiling at him. "I'll get the swim- -
ming things if you want to swim."
"Good," he said. "I'll go get my espadrilles."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
They lay on the sand where David had spread the beach
and the towels in the shade of a red rock and the girl said ''V:
go In . d an swim and then I will." ' -
He lifted very slowly and gently up out and away from her and
- then waded out from the beach and dove under where the water was cold and swam deep. When he came up he swam out
against the chop of the breeze and then swam in to where the'
girl was waiting for him standing up to her waist in the her
black sleek and wet, her light brown dripping. He
held her tight and the waves washed against them.
They kissed and she said, "Everything of ours washed into the
:: Oee"n"
"We have to get back."
"Let's go under once together tight."
Back at the hate! Catherine had not arrived and after they
showers and changed David and Marita sat at the bar
martinis. They looked at each other in the mirror. They
watch"d each other very carefully and then David passed his
" under his nose while he looked at her and she blushed.
, I want to have more things like that," she said. "Things that
we have so I won't be jealous."
"I wouldn't put out too many anchors," he. said. ''You might
the cables."
" "No. I'll find things to do that wilJ hold you."
:,': 'That's' a good practical Heiress," he said.
I could change that name. Don't.you?"
go to the bone," he said.
let's really change mine," she said. "Would you mind
.... Haya."
it again please." 
Ernest Hemingway
"Haya."
"Is it good?"
''Very good. It's a small name between us. For nobody else
ever."
"\Vhat does Haya
"The one who blushes. The modest one."
He held her close and tight and she settled against him and
her head was on his shoulder.
"Kiss me just on,ce," she said.
CatheI.ine came into the big room dishevelled, excited and
full of accomplishment and gaiety.
"You did take him swimming," she said. "You both do look' -
handsome enough, though still wet from the shower. Let me
look at you."
"Let me look at you," the girl said. ''What did you do to your :
hair?"
"It's cendre/ Catherine said. "Do you like it? It's a rinse that
Jean's experimenting with."
"It's beautiful," the girl said.
-Catherine's hair was strange and exalting against her
face. She picked up Marita's drink and sipping it watched
self in the mirror and said, "Did you have fun swimming?"
'We both had a good swim," the girl said., "But not as IOllg lIS
yesterday. "
''This is such a good ' drink, David," Catherine said. "VVh;at
makes your martinis better than anyone else's?"
"Gin," David said.
"Will you make me one please?"
"You don't want one now, Devil. We're going to have IUllcll."
"Yes I do," she said'. "I'm going to sleep after ,luneh.
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
'43
have to go through all the bleaching and re.bleaching
and all oHt. It's exhausting."
''What color is youF hair really now?" David asked.
"It's almost like white," she said. "You'd like it. But I want to
keep this so we see how it lasts."
"How white is it?" David asked.
"About like the soap suds," she said. "Do you remember?"
Th,at evening Catherine was completely different from the
way she had been at mid·day. She was sitting at the bar when
they drove ,up from swimming. The girl had stopped off at.her
,_ and when David came into the big main room he said,
:- 'What have you done to yourself now,- De,.vil?" ,
, '? shampooed all that nonsense 01:'t," she said. "It made gray
:' stains on the pillow."
, She looked yery striking, her hair a very light almost toneless
that made her face darker than it had ever looked.
"You're '160 damned beautiful," he said. "But I wish they'd
touched your hair."
"It's too late for that now. Can I tell you something else?"
"Sure."
fTomorrow I'm not going to have drinks, and I'm going to
Spani,sh and read again and stop thinking only about my.
God," David said. ''You had a big day. let me get a
and go in and change."
"I'll be here," Catherine said. "Put on your dark blue shirt will
one I got you like the one of mine?"
took his time in the shower and changihg and when he
back the two girls were together at the bar and he wished
' could have a painting of them, 
144 Ernest Hemingway
"I told Heiress everything about my new leaf," Catherine
said. "The one I just turned over and how I want you to love her
too and you can marry her too if she'll have you."
"We could in Africa if I was registered Mohammedan. You're
allowed three wives."
"I think it would he much nicer if we were all married,"
Catherine said. "Then no one could criticize us. Will you really
marry him, Heiress?"
''Yes,'' the girl said.
"I'm so pleased," Catherine said. "Everything I worried about
is so simple now."
"Would you really?" David asked the dark girl.
"Yes/' she said. "Ask me,"
David looked at her. She was very serious and excited. He
thought of her face with her eyes closed against the sun and her
black head against the whiteness of the towel robe on the yellow
sand as it had been when they had made lo.ve at last. "I'll ask
you," he said. "But not in any damned bar."
"This isn't any damned bar," Catherine said. "This is our own
special bar and we bought the mirror. I wish we could marry you
tonight."
"Don't talk balls," David said.
"I'm not," Catherine said. "I really mean it. Truly."
"Do you want a drink?" David asked.
"No," Catherine said. "I want to get it said right first. Look at ::
me and see." The girl was looking down and David looked
Catherine. "1 thought it all out this afternoon," she said. "I re-',
ally did. Didn't 1 tell you, Marita?" .
"She did," the girl said.
David saw that she "was serious about this and that they
reached some understanding that he did not know about.
"I'm still your wife," Catherine said. "We'll start with that.
want Marita to be your wife too to help me out and then she
herits from me."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
"Why does she have to inherit?"
"People make their wills" she said "And th' . .
tant th
'II " ' . IS IS more
anaWl .
"What about you?" David asked the girl.
want to do it if you want me to."
"G 00, d "h e sal 'd" . Do you mind if I have a drink?"
''You have one please," Catherine said. ''You see I'm not going
to have you ruined ifI'm crazy and I won't be able to dec'd I' . b Ie. m
not gomg to e shut up either. I decided that too. She loves you
you love her a little. I can tell. You'd never find anybody else
liIre her and I don't want you to go to some damn bitch b
lonely." or e
"C orne on and cheer up," David said. ''You're health goat." y as a
"Well, we're going to do it," Catherine said. "We'll work out
everything. " 
Chapter Seventeen
THE SUN WAS BRIGHT now in the room ,and it was a new day. You'
better get to work, he told himself. You can't change any of it
back. Only one person can change it back and she can't know _.
how she will wake nor if she'll be there when she wakes. It·-·
doesn't matter how you feel. You better get to work. You have to
make sense there. You don't make any in this other. Nothing will .
help you. Nor would have ever since it started.
When he finally got back into the story the sun was well up _'
and he had forgotten the two girls. It had been necessary to,
think what his father would have thought sitting'that evening
with his backagainst the green.yellow trunk of the fig tree '
the enameled cup of whiskey and water in his hand. His
had dealt so lightly with evil, giving it t:Io chance ever
denying its importance so that it had no status and no shape
dignity. He treated evil like an old entrusted friend,'
thought, and evil, when she poxed him, never kn<ewsh,e'dse,,,ed:.
His father was not he knew-and, unlike m'JStpeoplle
he had known, only death could kill him. Finally, he I<n<ewwh,,.
THE GARDEN OF EDEN '47
his father had thought and knowing it, he did not put it in the'
story. He only wrote .what ,his father did and how he felt and in
all this he became his father and what his father said to Malo
was what he said. He slept well on the ground under the: tree
and he waked and heard the leopard cough. Later he did not
hear the leopard in the camp but he knew he was there and he
went back to sleep. The leopard was meat and . .there was
plenty of meat so there was no problem. In the morning
daylight sitting by the ashes of the fire with his tea in the
- chipped enameled cup he asked Molo if the leopard had taken
'" meat and Malo said, "Ndiyo" and he said, 'Thereis plenty where
, we're. going. Get them moving so we can start the climb."
They were moving for the second through the high
. _ wooded and park-like country ahove the escarpment when he
:_ stopped finally and he was happy with the country and the day
,:_ and the distance they had made. He had his father's ability to
and not dread anything that coming. There was
day and another night ahead in new high cOlJ,ntry
- he stopped and he had two days and a night today.
_ Now that he left that country his father was with him still as.
. locked the door and walked back to the big room and the bar.
told the boy he did not want breakfast and to bring him a
Perrier and the morning paper. It was past noon and
intended to drive the old Isotta into Cannes and see that
repairs made but he knew the garages were closed now
it was too late. Instead he stood at the har because that's
would have found his father at that hour and, ha-ring
come down from the high country, he missed him. The sky
_ was very much the sky that_he had-left. It was high blue
the clouds white cumulus and he welcomed his father's
res,en',e a.t the bar until he glanced in the mirror and saw he
-. alone. He had' intended to ask his father about two things.
, father, who ran his life more disastrously than any man that 
Ernest Hemingway
he had ever known, gave marvelous advice. He distilled it out of
the bitter mash of all his previous mistakes with the freshening
addition of the new mistakes he about to make and he gave it
with an accuracy and precisio':l that carried the authority of a
man who had heard all the more grisly provisions of his sentence
and gave it no more importance than he had given to the fine
print on a transatlantic steamship ticket.
He was sorry that his father had not stayed but he could hear
the advice clearly enough and he smiled. His father would have
given it more exactly but he, David, had stopped writing because
he was tired and, tired, he could not do justice to his father's
style, No one could, really, and sometimes his father could not
either. He knew now, more than ever, why he had always put off
writing this story and he knew he must not think about it now
that he had,left it or he would damage his ability to write it.
You must not worry about it you start nor when you
stop he told himself. You're lucky to have it and don't start fumbling with it now. If you cannot respect the way you handle your
life then certainly respect your trade. You know about your
at least. But it was a rather awful story really. By God it was.
He sipped the whiskey and Perrier again and looked out
door at the late summer day. He was cooling out as he a1'Na)1S
did and the giant killer made better. He wondered
the girls were. They were late agaiJ? and he hoped that- this
it would be nothing bad. He was not a tragic character, h.,rin.
his father and being a writer barred him from that, and as
finished the whiskey and Perrier he felt even less of one.
had never known a morning when he had not waked happi,ly
until the enormity of the day had touched him and he
accepted this day now as he had accepted all the others
himself. He had lost the capacity of suffering,
thought he had, and only could be hurt truly bywh>atha!pp'"''
to, others. He believed this, wrongly of course since he did
know then how one's capacities can change, nor how the
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 149
could change, and it was a comfortable belief. He thought of
the two girls and wished that they would tum up. It was getting
too late to swim before lunch but he wanted to see'the'm. He
thOUght about them both. Then he went into his and Catherine's room and took a shower and shaved. He was shaving when
the car come up and he felt the sudden empty feeling
In hIS gut. Then he heard their voices and heard them laughing
and he found a fresh pair of shorts and a shirt and pulled them
on and went out to see how things would be.
The three of them had quiet drinks and then a lunch that was
goo«:J but light and they drank Tavel and when they were eating
and fruit Catherine said, "Should I tell him?"
"If you want," girl said. She picked Up her wine and drank
part of it down.
"I forgot how to say it," Catherine said. ''We waited too long."
"Can't you remember it?" the, girl said.. .
"No, I've forgotten it and it was wonderful. We had it all
'wock,edout and it was reaIIywonderful."
David poured himself another glass of Tavel.
"Do you want to try for just the factual content?" he asked.
"I know the factual content," Catherine said. "It's that
, you made siesta with me and then you went to Marita's
but today you can just go there. But I've spoiled it now and
,I wish is we could all just make siesta together."
"Not siesta," David heard himself say.
"I suppose not," Catherine said. 'WelI I'm sorry I said it all
and 1 couldn't help saying what 1 Wished." .
, ,In the room he said to Catherine, 'To hell with her."
'. "No, David. She wanted to do what I asked her. Maybe she
tell you."
.: "Fuck her."
.', 'Well you have," she said .. "That's not the point. Go and talk 
Ernest Hemingway
with her David. And if you want to fuck her then fuck her good
for me."
"Don't talk rough."
used it. I just knocked it back. Like tennis."
"All right," David said. "What's she supposed to say to me?"
"My speech," Catherine said. 'The one I forgot. Don't look so
serious or I won't let you go. You're awfully appealing when
you're You'd better go before she forgets the speech."
'The heII with you too."
"That's good. Now you're reacting better. I like you when you
are more careless. Kiss me goodbye. I mean good afternoon. You
really better go or she really will forget the speech. Don't you see
how reasonable and good I am?"
"You're not reasonable and good."
''You like me though."
"Sure."
"Do you want me to teII 'you a secret?"
"A new one?"
"An old'one."
"All right."
"You aren't very hard to corrupt and awful lot of fun
to corrupt."
''You ought to know."
"It was just a joke secret. There isn't any corruption. ""JUO"
have fun. Go on in and have her make my speech before she for.-:
gets it too. Go on and be a good boy David."
In the room at the far end of the hotel David lay on the
.and said, "What's it all about really?"
"It's just what she said last night," the girl said.
means it. You don't know how much she means it."
"Did you tell her we'd made love?"
"No."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
"She knew it."
"Does it
"It didn't seem to."
"Take a glass of wine, David, and be comfortable. I'm not in.
'" different," she said. "1 hope you know that."
"I'm not either," he said.
Then their lips were together and he felt her body against
and her breasts against his chest and 'her lips tight against his and
then open, her head moving froID: side to side and her breathing
and the feel of his belt bucJde against his belly and in his hands.
:_ They lay on the beach and David watched the sky and the
, ,movement of the clouds and did not think at alI. Thinking did
and when he lay down he had thought that if he did not
then everything that .was wrong go away. The girls
talking but he did not listen to them. He lay and watched
September sky and when the girls had fallen silent he
Stim"d to think and without looking the girl he a$ked, 'What
you thinking?"
"Nothing," she said.
"Ask me," Catherine said.
_
"1 can guess what you're thinking."
_ "No you can't. 1 was thinking about the Prado."
;, ,"Have you been there?" David asked the girl.
"Not yet," she said.
''We'll go," Catherine said. "\Nnen can we go, David?"
. David said. "I want to finish this story first."
"Will you work hard on the story?"
" "That's what I'm dOing. 1 can't work any harder."
"I didn't mean to hurry it."
" "I won't," he said. "If you're getting bored here you two go on
, and I'll find you there." , .
don't want to do that," Marita said. 
F
i
,
,
t
,
iErnest Hemingway "Don't be silly," Catherine said. "He's just being noble." "No. You can go." "It wouldn't be any fun without you," Catherine said. "You know that. We two in Spain wouldn't be fun." "He's working, Catherine," Marita said.
"He could work in Spain," Catherine said. "Plenty of Spanish
writers must have worked in Spain. I'll bet I could write well in
Spain if I was a writer."
"I can write in Spain," David said. "When do you want to go?"
"Damn you, Catherine," Marita said. "He's in the middle of a
story."
"He's been writing for over six weeks," Catherine said. "Why
can't we go to Madrid?"
"I said we could," David said.
,
"Don't you dare do that," the girl said to Catherine. "Don't
you dare to try to do that. Haven't you any conscience at all?"
"You're a fine one to talk abouf conscience," Catherine said.
"I have a conscience about some things."
"That's fine. I'm happy to know it. Now will you try to be po·
lite and not interfere when someone is trying to work out what's
best for everyone?"
"I'm going to swim," David said.
The girl got up and followed him and outside the cove while
they treaded water she said, "She's crazy."
"So don't blame her."
"But what are you going to do?"
"Finish the story and start another."
"So what do you and I do?"
'What we can."
Chapter Eighteen
. in four days. He had in it all the pressure
had.built he was writing it and the modest part of him
'_ afraId that It could not possibly he as good as he believed it
" . The cold, hard part knew it was hetter.
': 'How was it today?" the girl asked him.
. "
I read it?"
you want to."
,"You wouldn't mind truly?"
, in those two cahiers" in the top of the suitcase." He handed
key and then sat at-the har and drank a' whiskey and Per.
and. read the morning paper. She came back and sat on a
a httle way down from him and read the story.
. she finished it she started to read it over again and he
himself a second whiskey and soda and watched h d hfi'hd'th _errea. s e hIS e It e second time he sa,'d "D I'k' "" '1"s n,ot. thi', 'g . ' 0 you 1 e Itt -': you hke or not like," she'said. "It's your father 
'54 Ernest Hemingway
'Was this when you stopped loving him?"
"No. I always loved him. This was when I got to know him."
"It's a terrible story and it's wonderful."
"I'm glad you like it," he said.
"I'll put it back now," she said. "I like going in the room when _'
the door is locked."
'We have that," David said.
When they came back from the beach they found C"th"ri"e.:
in the garden.
"So you got back," she said.
''Yes,'' David said. 'We had a good swim. I wish you'd
there."
'Well, I wasn't," she said. "If it's of any interest to you."
"Where did you go?" David asked.
"I was in Cannes on my own business," she said. ''You're
late for lunch."
"I'm sorry," David said. "Do you want to have anything
lunch?"
"Please excuse me, Catherine," Marita said. "I'll be back in
moment."
''You're still drinking before lunch?" Catherine, asked
''Yes,'' he said. "I don't think it matters if you're getting a
exercise."
"There was an empty-whiskey glass on the bar when I
. " In.
''Yes,'' said David. "I had two whiskeys
"Actually," she mimicked him. ''You're very British today."
"Really?" he said. "I didn't feel very British. I felt sort of
assed Tahitian."
"It's just your way of speaking that irritates me," she
''Your choice of words."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN '55
"I see," he said. "Did you want a shot before they bring the
chow?"
''You don't have to be a down."
"The best clowns don't talk," he said.
"Nobody accused you of being the best of clowns," she said.
"Yes. I'd like a drink if it isn't too'much work for you to make it."
He made three martinis, measuring them each out separately
and pouring them int? the pitcher where there was a big chunk
and then stirring.
'Who is the third drink for?"
"Manta."
''Your paramour?"
"My what?"
'''Your paramour."
"You really said it," David told her. "f'd never-heard that word
,pr<mo,unced and I had absolutely no hope of ever hearing it in
. life. You're really wonderful."
"It's a perfectly common word."
"It is at that," David ·said. "But to Have the sheer, naked
to use it in conversation. Devil, be good now. Couldn't
say 'your dusky paramour'?"
_ Catherine looked away as she raised her glass.
- I used to find this type ofbante; amusing," she said.
you- want to' try to be decent?" David asked. "Both of us
1m,""""
she said. "Here comes your whatever you call he;r look.
sweet and innocent as ever. I must say rm glad I had her be·
you did. Dear Marita-tell me, did David work before he
today?" :-:. David?" Marita asked.
finished a story," David said.
I suppose Marita's already read it?"
I did:' 
Ernest Hemingway
''You know, I've never read a story of David's. 1 never interfere.
I've only tried to make it possible for him to do the
best work of which he is capable."
David took a sip of his drink and looked at her. She was the
same wonderful dark and beautiful girl as ever and the ivory.
white hair was like a scar across her forehead. Only her eyes had
changed and her lips that were saying things they were incapable of saying.
"I thought it was a very good story," Marita said. "It was
strange and how do you _say pastorale. Then it became terrible in
a way I could not explain. I thought it was magnifique."
'Well-," Catherine said. 'We all speak French you know. You I
might have made the whole emotional outburst in French."
"I was deeply moved by the story," Marita said.
"Because David wrote it or because it really is first rate?"
"Both," the girl said.
'Well," Catherine said, "is there any reason then why I can't,
read this extraordinary story? I did put up the money for it." .
''You did what?" David asked.
not exactly. You did have fifteen. hundred doll""
when you married me and that book about all the m.,d lBe"I,',
sold, hasn't it? You never tell me how mu.ch. But I did put up --
substantial sum and you must admit-you've lived
ably than you did before you married me."
The girl did not say anythjng and David watched the
setting the table on the terrace. He looked at his watch. It
about twenty minutes before the time they usually had
"I'd like to go in and dean up if I may;" he said.
"Don't be so bloody false polite," Catherine said. ""-'h" e.m',
I read the story?"
"It's just written in pencil. It hasn't even been copied.
wouldn't want to read it that way."
"Marita read it that way."
THE GARDEN OF ED.EN
"Read it ,after lunch then."
"I want to read it now, David."
"I really wouldn't read it before lunch."
"Is it disgusting?"
'57
"It's a story about Africa back before the 1914 War. In the time
of the Maji-Maji ,War. The. native rebellion of 1905 in Tan-
'-: ganyika."
"I didn't know you wrote historical novels."
"I wish you'd leave it-alone," David said. "It's a story that happens in Africa when I was about eight years old."
"I want to read it."
David had gone to the far end of the bar and was shaking dice
of a leather cup. The girl sat on a stool next to Catherine. He
-:. watched her watching Catherine as she read.
"It starts very well," she said. "Though your handwriting is
ab,ock' m" The couritry is superb. The passage. What Marita'
'mii'Cl,lle.d the pastorale part."
She put down the first notebook and the-girl picked it up and
it on her lap, her eyes still watching Catherine:
Catherine read on and said nothing now. She was halfway
hr(m!:h the second part. Then_ she tore the cahier in two and
it on the floor .
. ,. she said. "It's bestiai. So that was what your fa- h.
said David. "But that was one way he was. You didn't
"Nothing would make me finish it."
-, didn't want you to read it at all."
-, "No. You both conspired to make me read it."
"May I have the key, David, to lock it'up?" the girl asked. She
.. retrieved the torn halves of the notebook from the floor. It 
Ernest Hemingway
was just ripped apart. It was not tom across. David gave her his key.
"It's even more horrible written in that child's notebook,"
. Catherine said. "You're a monster."
"It was a very odd r~beUion," David said.
''You're a very odd person to write about it," she said. "I asked you not to read the story." She wa$ crying now. "I hate you," she said.
They were in their room in bed and it was late. "She'II go away and you'll have me shut up or put away,~ Catherine said.
"No. That isn't true."
"But you suggested we go to Switzerland." "If you were worried we could see a good doctor. The same-·
way we'd go to the dentist."
"No. They'd shut me up. I know. Everything that's innocent
us is crazy to them. I know about those places." "It's an easy drive and beautiful. We'd go by AVo: and St. and up the Rhone from Lyon to Geneva. We'd see him and
some good advice and make a fun trip out of it." "I won't go."
"A very good intelligent doctor that-" "I won't go. Didn't you hear me? I won't go. I won't go. D.,vou want me to scream?"
"AIl right. Don't think about it no.w. Just try to sleep." "If I don't have to go."
"We don't have to."
"I'll sleep then. Are you going to work in the morning?" ''Yes. I might as well."
"You'll work well," she said. "I know you will. Good David. You sleep well too."
TH,E GARDEN OF EDEN '59
He did not sleep for a long time. When he did he had dreams -of Africa. They were good dreams until the one that woke him. He got up then and went direct from {hat dream to work He
, was well into the new story before the sun came up out of the sea and he did not look up from where he was to see how red the '_" sun was. In the story he was waiting for the moon to rise a.nd he his dog's hair rise under his hand as he stroked him to be ': quiet and they both watched and listened as the moon came up ",and gave them shadows. His
~rm was around the dog's neck L,",owand he could feel him shivering. AU of the night sounds h'ad .' stopped. They did not hear the elephant and David did not see :: ~ until the dog turned his head -and seemed to settle into
-David. Then the elephant's shadow covered them and he moved making no noise at all and they smelled him in the light that came down from the mountain. He smelled strong 'Qut old and sour and when he was past David 'saw that the left tuslK ,"as so long it seemed to reach the ground. They waited hut oo"th,eI elephants came by and then David.and the dog started ,ff,wonilng in the moonlight. The dog kept close behind him when David stopped the dog pressed his muzzle into the knee. David had to see the bull again anq they came "P
o
:::::'
i
: at the edge of the forest. He was travelling m toward the and slowly now moving into the steady night breeze. came close enough to see him cut off the moon again and smell the sour oJdness but he could not see the right tusk. He afraid to work closer with the dog and he took him back the wind and pushed him do\Wl against the base of a tree tried to make him understand. He thought the dog would and he did but when David moved up tow~rd the bulk of elephant again he felt the wet muzzle against the hollow of knee.
, 'The two of them followed the elephant until he came to an
- in the trees. He stood .there moving hiS huge ears. His 
· ,•
·
160 Ernest Hemi,ngway
bulk was in the shadow but the moon would be on his head.
David reached behind him and closed the dog's jaws gently with
. his hand and the'n moved softly and unbreathing to his right ,
along the edge of the night breeze feeling it on his cheek. edg.
ing with it, never letting it get between him and the bulk until
he could see the elephant's head and the great ears moving. The right tusk was as thick as his own thigh and it curved
down almost to the ground.
He and the dog moved back, the wind on his neck now, and
they backtracked out of the forest and into the open park country. The dog was ahead of him now and he stopped where David' .
had left the two hunting spears by the trail when they had followed the elephant. He swung them over his shoulder in their
thong and leather cup harness and, with his best spear that he :
had kept with him all the time in his hand, they started on
trail for the shamba. The moon was high now arid he wondered _,
why there was rio drumming from the shamba. Something
strange if his father was there and there was no drumming.
Chapter Nineteen
Ii"", ,="" LYING on the firm sand of the smallest of the three
the one they always went to when they were alone, and
gmlSa."',, "She won't go to Switzerland."
shouldn't go to Spain is a bad place to ,ack llD," '
as though we'd been married all our lives and never
)'ldan,,,hin. but problems." She pushed his hair back from his
'orehe"d d,UUhl"eu him. "Do you want to swim now?"
, "Yes. Let's dive from the high rock. The really high one."
":, ''You do," she said. "I'll swim out and you dive over my head."
: "AIl right. But hold still when I dive."
:- "See how close you can come."
she watched -him on the high rock, arced
ro the blue sky. Then he came toward her and the
rose in a spout from a hole in the water behind her shoulHe turned under water and came up in front of her and
'001' n'" head. "I cut it too fine," he said.
swam out to the point and back and then wiped each
dr,' and dressed on the, beach. 
Ern'est Hemingway
''You really liked me diving that close?"
"I loved it."
He kissed her and she felt cool and fresh from the swimming
and she still tasted of the sea.
Catherine came in while they were still sitting at the bar. She. _
was tired and quiet and polite. . .
At the table she said, "I went to Nice and then drove the httle
Corniche and 1 stopped up above Villefranche and watched a
battle cruiser come in and then it was late."
''You weren't very late," Marita said.
"But it was very strange," Catherine said. "All the colors
too bright. Even the grays were bright. The olive trees were
tery." ,
"That's the noon light," David said. .
" , . d It "No.1 don't think so," sh,e said. It ,wasn t very mce an .
lovely when I stopped to watch the ship. She didn't look big to _
have such a big name."
"Please eat some of the steak," David said. ''You've
hardly anything."
"I'm sorrv" she said. "It's good. 1 like tournedos."
--" th '" "Would you like something instead of e meat.
"No. I'll eat the salad. Do you think we could have a boW" 01
the Perrier-Jouet?"
"Of course."
"It was always such a nice wine," she said. "And we were
ways so happy with it." ..",
Afterward in their room Cathenne saId, Don t worry,
please. It's just 'speeded up so much lately."
"How?" he asked. He was stroking her forehead.
"I do;n't know. AIl of a suddt';n I was old this morning and
wasn't even the right time of year. Then the colors started to
false. I worried and wanted to get you taken care of."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
''You take wonderful care of everybody."
"I'm going to but I was so tired and there wasn't any time and
I knew it would be so humiliating if the money ran out and you
had to borrow and I hadn't fixed up anything nor Signed anything and just been sloppy the way I've been. Then I worried
about your dog."
"My dog?"
''Yes your dog in Africa in the story. I went in the room to see
you needed anything and I read the story. While yoti and
'- Marita were talking in the other room. I didn't listen. You left
keys in the shorts you changed from."
"It's about half through," he told her.
"It's wonderful," she said. "But it frightens me. The elephant
,'was so strange and your father too. I never liked him but I like
dog better than anyone except you David, and I'm so wori ried al)oul him."
"He was a wonderful d_og. You don't have to worry about him."
"Can I read about what happened to him today in the story?"
"Sure, if you want to. But he's at the shamba now and you
lb,," "e"d to worry about him."
"If he's all right I won't read it until you get back to him. Kibo.
had a lovely name."
_ "It's the name of a mountain. The other part is Mawenti."
: ''You and Kibo. I love you so much. You were so much alike."
.. feeling better, Devil."
said. "I'hope so. But it won't last. Drivthis morning' I was so very happy and then suddenly I was
old I didn't care anymore."
not old."
I am. I'm older than mymother's old clothes and I
your dog. Not even in-a story." 
Chapter Twenty
DAVID HAD FINISHED writing and he was empty and hollqwfeeling from having driven himself long past the point where he ...
should have stopped. He did not think it mattered that day be- ;'
cause It was the exhaustion part of the story and so he had felt
the tiredness as soon as they had picked up the trail again. For a ,-'_
long time he had been fresher and in better shape than the --
men and impatient with their slow trailing and the regular halts-'
his father made each hour on the hour. He could have m,wed
ahead much faster than Juma and his father but when
started to tire they were the same as ever and at nOQ,n ,h,·v 'nol,
only the usual five minute rest and he had seen that Juma
increasing the pace a little. Perhaps he wasn't. Perhaps it
only seemed- faster but the dung was fresher now although
was not wann yet to the touch. Juma gave him the rifle to
after they came on the last pile of dung but after an _hour
looked at him' and took it back. They had been e1i'ml'inl' S1:ea,dily
across a slope of the mountain but now the trail went down an,
from a gap in the forest he saw the broken country ahead.
"Here's where the tough part starts, Davey," his father
TH EGA R DEN 0 FED E N 165
:: It was then he knew that he should have been sent back to the
, shamba once he had put them on the trail. Juma had known it
for a long time. His father knew it now and there was nothing to
, he done. It was another of hi,s mistakes and there was nothing
. to do now except David looked down at the hig
. of the prmt of the elephant foot and saw where the
had been pressed down and where·a broken stem 6f a
weed was drying beyond the 'break. Juma picked it up
,an,d I'Dol<ed at the sun. Juma handed the broken weed to David's
and his father rolled it in his fingers. David noticed the
that were drooped. and drying. But they still had
dned In the sun nor shed their petals.
_ ':1t'5 to be a bitch," his father said. "Let's get going."
. Late In the afternoon they were stilI tracking through the brocountry. ,He had been sleepy now fur a long time and as he
;wal:ch"d the two- men he knew that sleepiness was his real en- .
and he followed their pace and tried to move through and
of the sleep that deadened him. The two men relieved each
tracking on the hour and one who was'in second place
back at him at regular intervals to check if he was with
When they made a dry camp at dark in the forest again he
.to sleep as soon as he down'and woke with Juma holdmoccasins ,and feeling his bare feet for blisters. His faspread his coat over him and was sitting by him with a
of cold cooked meat and two biscuits. He offered him a
bottIe with cold tea.
have to feed, his father said. ''Your feet are in
shape. They're as sound as Juma's. Eat this slowly and
tea and go to sleep again. We haven't any problem."
sorry I was so sleepy."
and Kibo hunted travelled all last night. Why
!o"ldn,'1 you be sleepy? You can have a little more meat if you 
,
166 . Ernest Hemingway
"Good. We're good for three days. We'll hit water again tomorrow. Plenty of creeks come off the mountain."
"Where's he going?"
"Juma thinks he knows."
"Isn't it bad?"
"Not too bad, Davey."
"I'm going back to sleep," David had said. "I don't need your
coat."
"Juma and I are all right," his father said. "I always sleep,
wann you know."
David was asleep even before his father said good night. Then
he woke once with the moonlight on his face and he thought. of"
the elephant with his great ears moving as he stood in the for- .
est, his head hung down with the weight of the tusks.
thought then in the night that the hollow way he felt as he re- .
membered him was from waking hungry. But it was not and
found that out in the next three days.
In the .story he had tried to make the elephant come
again as he and Kibo had seen him in the night when the
had risen. Maybe I can, David thought, maybe I can. But as
locked up the day's work and went out of the room and shut
door he told himself, No, you can't do it. The elephant was
and if it had not been your father it- would have been someOD<
else. There is nothing you can do except try to write it the om·
that it was. So you must write each day better than you possilbl:
can and use the sorrow that you have now to make you
how the early sorrow came. And you must always remember
things you believed because if you know them they will be
in the writing and, you won't betray them. The writing is th" 0101:
progress you make.
He went behind' the bar and found the bottle of Haig and
cold half bottle of Perrier and made himself a drink and took
out in the big kitchen to find Madame. He told her he was
ing into Cannes and would n9t be back lunch. She
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
: him about drinking whiskey on an empty stomach and he asked
. her what she had cold that he could put in the empty stomach
.wiith ,the Wfli·,skey. She brought out some cold chicken and sliced
"it and put it-on a plate and made an endive salad and he went
the bar and made another drink and came back to sit down .
at the kitchen table.
"Don't drink that now before you eat, Monsieur," Madame
.: said.
"It's good for me," he told her. 'We drank it at the mess like
in the war."
"It's a wonder you weren't all drunkards."
-"Like the French," he said they argued French working
'. both agreed, and she teased
that his women had left him. He said that he was tired of
place now? No, she
he would have to show more evidence he was a man before
'roused a woman ?f Midi. He said he was going into
;anme",'herE he could get a proper meal and would come back '
a lion and ,let the women of the south take care. They kissed
fectiona',el), with the kiss of the favoured client and the brave
and then David went in to take a shower, to shave and to
shower made him feel good and he was cheered up from
to Madame. I wonder what she would say if she knew
hal,jt ·was ar about, he thought. Things had changed since the
and both Monsieur and Madame had a sense of style and
,.y'Mshed to move with the change. We three clients are all de
bien. So long as it pays and isn't violent there is nothwrong with it. The Russians are,gone, the British are beginto be poor, the Gennans are ruined, and now there is this
of the established rules which can veryweII be the salof the whole coast. We are pioneers in opening up the
season which is stilI regarded as madness. He looked at
in the mirror with one side shaved. Stil1, he said to 
1
"
Ern,est Hemingway
himself, you don't need to be such a pioneer as not to shave the
other side. Ana then he noted with careful critical distaste the
almost silvery whiteness of his hair.
He heard the Bugatti come up the long slope and tum
the gravel and stop.
Catherine came into the room. She had a scarf over her head
and sunglasses on and she took them off and kissed David. He '
held her close and said, "How are you?"
"Not so good," she said. "It was too hot." She smiled at him
and put her forehead on his shoulder. "I'm glad I'm home."
He went out and made a Tom Collins and brought it in
Catherine who had finished a cold shower. She took the
cold glass and sipped from it and then held it against the smoot:h
dark skin of her belly. She touched the glass to the tips
of her breasts 'so they came erect and then took a long sip
held the cold glass against her beIIy again. ''This is wonderful:'
she said ..
He kissed her and she said, "Oh, that's nice. I'd fm"go,tter
about that. I don't see any good reason why I should give
up. Do you?"
"No."
"Well, I haven't," she said. "I'm not going to tum you over to
someone else prematurely. That was a silly idea."
"Get dressed and come on out," David said.
"No. I want to have fun with you like in the old days."
"How?"
''You know. To make you happy."
"How happy?"
"This."
"Be careful," he said.
"Please."
"All right, if you want."
''The way it was in Grau du Roi the first time it ever
pened?"
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
"If you want."
"Thank you for giving me this time because--"
"Don't talk."
"It's just like Grau du Roi but it's lovelier because it's in the
:: 'daytime and love each other more because I'd gone away.
' let's be slow and slow and slow-" ,
"res slow."
"Areyou-"
''Yes.''
"Are you really?"
''Yes if you want."
"Oh I want so much and you are and I have. Please be slow
let me keep it."
"You have it."
-, ''Yes I do. I do have it. Oh yes I do. I do. Please come now with
Please can you now-"
'-
, 'they lay on the sheets and Catherine with her brown leg over
touching his instep lightly with her toes rested on her eI-
, " .
and lifted her mouth fr?m his and said, "Are you glad to
me back?"
. ''You,'' he said. ''You did come back.'"
:'You never thought I would. Yesterday it was all gone and
everythin,g was over and now here I am. Are' you happy?"
you remember when all. I wanted was to be so dark and
lov,]"m the darkest white girl in the world."
':, "And the blondest. You're just like ivory. That's how I always
'. You're smooth-as ivory too."
, so happy and I want to have fun with you the way we al-
- had. But mine is mine. I'm not going to tum you over to
way I was doing and keep nothing. That's over."
not awfully dear," David said. "But you really are fine
aren't you?" 
Ernest Hemingway
"I really am, ': Catherine said. "I'm not gloomy or morbid or
pitiful."
''You're nice and lovely."_ "
"It's all wonderful and changed. We're going to take
Catherine said. ''You're mine today and tomorrow. And you re
Marita's the next two days. My God, I'm hungry. This is the first
time I've been hungry in a week."
When David and Catherine came back from swimming in the
late afternoon they drove into Cannes for the Paris papers and
then sat at the cafe and read and talked before they came home.
After David had changed he found Marita sitting at the bar '
reading. He recognized the book as his own. The one she had "
not read. "Did you have a good swim?" she asked.
''Yes. We swam a long way
"Did you dive from the high rocks?"
"No."
"I'm glad of that," she said. "How is Catherine?"
"More cheerful."
''Yes. 'She is very intelligent."
"How are you? Are you all right?"
"Very well. I'm reading this book."
"How is it?"
"I can't tell you till day after tomorrow. I'm re"di"g ""'y slo.,ly
to make it last."
"What's that? The pact?" .
"I suppose so. But I wouldn't worry very much about th" b'DOk
nor how I feel about you. It's not.changed."
"All right," David said. "But I missed you very badly
morning." "
"Day after tomorrow," she said. "Don't worry.
Chapter
NEXT DAY hi the story was very bad because long before
he knew that it was' not just the need for sleep that made
difference between a boy and men. For the first three hours
was fresher than they were and he asked Juma for the .303
to carry but Juma shook his head. He did not smile and he
" , always been David's bestJriend and had taught him to hunt.
offered it to me yesterday, David thought, and I'm in much
shape today than 1 was yesterday. He was too but by ten
he knew the day would be bad or worse than the day be-
. It was as silly for him to think that he could trail with
is filth,,, as to think he could fight with him. He knew too
was not just that they were men. They were profeSSional
and he knew now that was why Juma would not eyen
a smile. They knew everything the elephant had done,
out the signs of it to each other without speaking, and
the tracking became difficult ryis father always yielded to
When they stopped to fill the water bottles at a stream
father said, "Just last the day out, Davey." Then when they
finally past the broken country cJimbing again toward 
Ernest Hemingway
the forest the tracks of the elephant turned off to the right onto
an old- elephant trail. He saw his father and Juma talking and
when he got up to them Juma was looking back over the way
they had come and then at a far distant stony island of
in the dry country and seemed to be taking a bearing of this
against the peaks of three far blue hills on the horizon.
"Juma knows where he's going -now," his father explained.
"He thought he knew before but then he dropped down into
this stuff." He looked back at the country' they had come .'
through all day. "Where he's headed now is pretty good going
but we'll have to climb."
They had climbed until it was dark and then made another .:
dry camp. David had killed two spur fowl with his slingshot out -,
of a small flock that "had walked across the trail just .before the"
sunset. The birds had come into the .old elephant to dust,
walking neatly and plumply, and when, the pebple broke
back of one and the bird began to jerk and toss with its "';".,
thumping, another bird ran forward to peck at it and
pouched another pebble and pulled it back and sent it ag"inst
the ribs of the second bird. As he ran forward to put his h .. ,d ,m
it the other birds whirred off. Juma had looked back and
this time and David picked up the two birds, wann and
and smoothly feathered and knocked their heads against
handle of his hunting knife.
Now where they-were camped for the night his father
"I've never seen that type of Francolin quite' so high. You
very well to get a double on them." .
Juma cooked the birds spitted on a stick over the coals
very small fire. His father drank a whiskey and water from
cup top of his flask as they lay and watched Juma
ward Juma gave them each a breast with the heart in it and
the: two necks and backs and the legs himself.
"It makes a great d,ifference, Davey," his father said. "
very well off on rations now."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
"How far are we behind him?" asked.
'We're quite clos.e actually," his father said. "It all depends on
he travels when the moon comes up. It's an hour later
'tol'iglot and two hours later than When you found him."
think he knows where he's going?"
": him and killed his aSkari not too far from here."
.ago, he says. That may mean anytime. When you "e still " toto he says."
'-- "Has he been alone since then?"
:, ""He says so. He hasn't seen him. Only heard of him."
"How big does he say he is?"
-. "Close to two hundred. Bigger than anything I've ever seen.
says there's only been one greater elephant and he came
near here too." • .
-:.: 'Td better get to sleep," David said. "I hope I'll be better to- " .
were splendid today," his father said. "I was very proud
. So was Juma." .
when he woke after the moon was up he was sure
were not proud of him except perhaps for his dexterity in
the two birds. had found the elephant at night and
him to see that he had both of his tusks and then reto find the two men and put them on the trail. David
. they were proud of that. But once the deadly following
. he was useless to them and a danger to their success just
had been to him when he had gone up close to'the elein the night, and he knew they must each have hated
,,"',elv.es for not having sent him back when there was time.
of the elephant weighed two hundred pounds apiece.
since these tusks grown beyond their normal size the
been hunted for them and now the three of them
kill him. David was Sure that they would kin him now
David, had lasted through the day and kept up after 
174 Ernest Hemingway
the pace had destroyed him by, noon. So they probably were,
proud of him doing that. But he had 'brought nothing useful to .
the hunt and they would have been far better off without him. '
Many times during the day he had wished that he had never be- ..
. trayed the elephant and in the afternoon he remembered wish- ,
ing that he had never seen him. Awake in the moonlight he :
knew that was not true.
All morning, writing, he had been trying to remember
how he felt and what had happened on that day. The hardest to '
make truly was how he had felt and keep it untinctured by
he had felt later. The details of the country were sharp and clear
as the morning until the fOlresholrtelnin,g "nd, plo!,mg:ationofexhaustion and he had written that well. But his feeling about
elephant had been the hardest part and he knew he would
to get away from it and then COme back to it to be certain it
as it had been, not later, but on that day. He knew the
had begun to fonn but he had been too exhausted to <Olnemb,el
it eXactly.
Still "involved in this problem and Hying in the ste'IJ'he!o"k"
up his suitcase and came out of the room onto the flagstone
that led. down to the terrace where Marita was sitting in a
under one of the pines facing out toward the sea. She was
ing and as he was walking barefooted she did not hear
David looked at her and was pleased to see her. Then he
membered the preposterous situation and turned into the
and walked to his and Catherine's own room. She wasn't in
room and, still'feelingAfrica to be completely real and all
where he was to be unreal and false, he went out on th,:terrac
to speak to Marita.
"Good morning," he said. "Have you seen Catherine?"
"She went off somewhere," the girl ;aid .. "She said to
she'd be back."
Suddenly it was not unreaJ at alI.
THE ·GARDEN OF EDEN
''You don't know where she went?"
"N "th . 0, e girl said. "She went off on her bike " "M G d" .
175
yo, David said. "She hasn't a b 'k .
, bought the Bug." I e Since we
,__ ''That's she said. She's taking it up again. bid you have
a good mommg?"
"I don't know. I'll know tomorrow"
"Are you eating breakfast?" .
"I don't know. It's late."
"I wish you would."
"I'll go in and get cleaned up " he told h H h ,er,
e. ad taken a shower and was shaving when Catherine
m. She was wearing an old Grau du Rai shirt and short
chopped off below knees and she was hot and
sh1ft was wet through. ..
"It's wonderful" h -'d "B I'd'
,_ . ,s e Sal. ut lOcgotten what it does to
upper thIghs when you climb."
"Did you ride very far, Devil?;'
- "5' kil . IX she said, "It was nothing but I'd forgotten
the cotes."
, '. awfully to ride now unless you go 'in the very early
:, 8h " DaVId "I'm glad you started again though." .
: was under the shower now and when she came out she
". see how dark we are together. We're just the way we
darker.'1
::. much. You're terribly too. Look at us together."
. looked at each other standing touching in the long mirthe door.
y,?U like us," she said. ''That's nice. So do J. Touch here
stood very straight and he put his hand on her breasts'
put on one of my tight shirts S? you' can tell what I think 
Ernest Hemingway
about things," she said. "Isn't it funny our hair hasn't any color
at all when it's wet? It's pale as seaweed."
She took a comb and combed her hair straight back so it
looked as though she had just come out of the sea.
"I'm going to wear mine this way now again," she said. "Like
Grau du Roi and here in the spring."
"I like it across your forehead."
"I'm tired of that. But I can do it if you like. Do you think we.
could go into town and have breakfast at the cafe?"
"Haven't you had breakfast?"
"I wanted to wait for you."
"All right," he said. "Let's go in and get breakfast. I'm hUlng:ry
too."
They had a very good breakfast of cafe au lait, brioche
strawberry jam and oeufs au plat avec jambon and when
were firiished Catherine asked, 'Would you come over with
to Jean's? It's the day I go to get my hair washed and I'm
to have it cut."
"I'll wait here for you."
"Wouldn't you please come? You did it before and it
bad for anybody."
"No, bevil. 1 did once but that was just once. Like gettiI'gtattooed or something. Don't ask me to."
"It doesn't mean anything except to me. I want us to
the same."
'We can't be the same."
''Yes we could if you'd let us."
"I really don't want to do it."
"Not if I say it's all I want?"
'Why can't you want something that makes sense?"
"I do. But I want us to be the same and you almost are
wouldn't be,any trouble to do. The sea's done all the work"
''Then let the sea do it."
"I want it for today."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 177
. you'll be happy I suppose."
i. "I'm happy now because you're going to do it and I'II stay
: happy. You Jove how 1 look You know you do. Think of it that '.way."
"It's silly."
"No it isn't. Not when it's you and you do it to please me."
"How badly will you feel if I don't?"
"I don't know. But very."
"All right," he said. "It really means all that to you?"
''Yes,'' she said. "Oh, thank you. It won't take very long this
I told Jean we'd be there and he's staying open for us."
"Are you always that confident I'll do things?"
"I knew you woul,d if you knew how much i wanted it."
"I wanted very much not to. You shouldn't askit."
''Yol;! won't care. It's nothing and. afterwards it will he fun.
Don'two,,,, about Marita."
her?"
.. said that if you wouldn't do it for me to ask you if you'd
for her." ,
"Don't make things up."
"No. She said it this morning."
. "I wish you could.see yourself," Catherine said.
.11 glad I can't."
"I 'visl, you'd looked in the glass."
, "
look at me. That's .how you are and I did it and there's
you can do now. That's how you look.".
couldn't really have that," David said. "I couldn't
wayY-ouda."
we did," Catherine ·said. "And you do. $0 you better like it.," ,
can't have done that, Devil." 
178 Ernest Hemingway
. ''Yes we did. You knew it too. You just wouldn't look. And we're
damned now. I was and now you are. Look at me and see how,
much you like it."
David looked at her eyes that he loved and at her dark face .c
and the incredibly fIat ivory color of her hair and at how "
she looked and ,he began to realize what a completely stupId,
thing he had pennitted. Chapter Twenty-two
DID NOT THINI< that he could go on with the story that
for a long time he could not. But he knew that he must
ndfin,'lIy he had started and they were following the Spoor of
elephant on an old elephant trail that was a· hard packed
yo.'n n'aa through the forest. It looked as though elephants had
",y"IIE,d it ever since the lava had cooled from the mountain
the trees had first grown taU and dose. Juma was very
ancJ. they moved fast. Both his father and Juma seemed
>tv "ure of themselves and the going On the elephant road was
'easy that Juma gave him the. 303 to carry as they went on
the broken light.of the forest: Then they lost the trail in
piles of fresh dung and the, fIat round prints of a herd
eie'phan'ts that had come onto the elephant road from the
forest on the left of trail. Juma had taken the .303
David angrily. It Was afternoon before. they had worked up
,the herd and around it seeing the gray bulks through the trees
the movement of 'the big ears and the searching trunks
,um'g '<Da uncoiling, the ,crash of branches broken. the crash 
180 Ernest Hemingway
of trees pushed over and the rumbling in the bellies of the ele- .
phants and the slap and thud of the dung falling.
They had found the trail of the bull finaIIy and when it:.-
turned off onto a smaIler elephant road Juma had looked
David's father and grinned showing his filed teeth and his
had nodded his head. They looked as though they had a dirty
cret, just as they had looked when he had found them that night
at the shamha.
I t was not very long before they came on the secret. It was
to the right in the forest and the tracks of the old bullIed to it. It .
was a skull as high as David's chest and white from the sun
the rains. There was a deep depression in the forehead
ridges ran from between the hare white- eye sockets and
out in empty broken holes where the tusks had been choPl)ed
away. Juma pointed out where the great elephant they were
ing had stood while he looked down at the skull and where
trunk had moved it a little way from the place it had ,",,'eel 0'1 th,
ground and where the points of his tusks had touched
ground beside it. He showed David the single hole in
pression in the white bone of forehead and then the
close together in the bone around the ear hole. He grinned
David and at his father and took a .303 solid from his pock,,, an,
fitted nose into the hole in the bone of the forehead.
"Here is where Juma wounded the big bull," his father
"This was his aslutri. His friend, really, because he was a big
too. He charged andJuma knocked him down and finishedhin in the ear."
Juma was pointing out the scattered bones and how the
bull had walked around among them. Juma and David's
were both very pleased with what they had found.
"How long do you suppose he and his friend had been / gether?" David asked his father.
"I haven't the faintest idea," his father said. "Ask Juma."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
''You ask him please."
His father and Juma spoke together and Juma had looked at
"D,.vid and laughed, .
"Probably four or five times yout life he says," David's father
him: "He doesn't know or care really." .
I care, David thought. I saw him in "the moonlight arid he was
but I had Kibo. Kibo has me too. The bull wasn't doing
.. ,anYOlle any harm and n()w "we've tracked him to where he came
" see his dead friend and now we're going to kill him. It's my
'. I betrayed him.
Now Juma had worked out the trail and motioned to his fa.
and they started on.
My father doesn't need to kill elephants to live, David thought.
would not have found him if I had not seen him. He had
chance at him and all he did wound him and kill his
Kibo and I found him and I never should have told them
I should have kept him secret and had him always and let
stay drunk with their hibis at the beer shamba. Juma was
not wake him. I'm going to keep everything a
always. I'll never tell them anything again. If they kill him
1m,. Wl'U drink his share of the ivory or just buy himself another
damn wife. Why didn't you help the elephant when you
to do was not go on the second day. No, that
stopped them. Juma would have gone on. You
should have told them. Never, never tell them. Try and reo
.embe, that. Never tell anyone anytJ.1ing ever. Never tell any.
.. mythi,ng again.
father waited for. him to come up and said very gently,
rested here. He's not travelling as he was. We'll be up on
iman)""ime now." "
:: "Fuck elephant hunting," David had said very quietly.
. that?" his father asked.
. elephant hunting," David said softly.
, 
Ernest Hemingway
"Be careful you don't fuck it up," his father had said to him
and looked at him flatly.
That's one thing, David had thought. He's not stupid. He knows all about it nOw and-he will never trust me again. That's good. I don't want him to because I'll never ever tell him or any~
body anything again never anything again. Never ever never.
Th'at was where he stopped in the hunt that morning. He knew he did not have it right yet. He had not gotten the enor- mity of the skull as they had come onto it in the forest nor the
tunnels underneath it iIi the earth that the beetles had made
and that had been revealed like deserted galleries or catacombs
when the elephant had moved the skull. He had not made the
great length of the whitened bones nor how the elephant's
. tracks had moved around the scene of the killing and how fol- lowing them he had been able to see the elephant as he had moved and then had been able to see what the elephant had
seen. He had not gotten the great width of the one elephant trail that was a perfect road through the forest nor the worn smooth.
rubbing trees nor the way other trails intersected so that they
were like the map of the Metro in Paris. He had not made the
light in the forest where the trees came together at their :tops and he had not clarified certain things that he must make as
they were then, not as he recaIled them now. The distances did
not matter since all distances changed and how you remem- ben:id them was how they were. But his change of feeling to- ward Juma and toward his father and toward the elephant was complicated by the exhaustion that had bred it. Tiredness
brought the beginning of understanding. The understanding
was beginning and he was realizing it_ as he "TOte. But the
dreadful true understanding was all to come and he must not
show it by arbitrary statements of rhetoric but by remembering the actual things that had brought it. Tomorrow he would get the things right and then go on.
He put the cahier.s of manuscript away in the suitcase and
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
locked it and came out the door of his room and walked along the front of the hotel to where Marita was reading.
"Do you want breakfast?" she asked.
"I think I'd like a drink."
"Let's have it at the bar," she said. "It's cooler."
They went in and sat down on stools and David poured from the Haig Pinch bottle into a glass and filled it up with cold Perrier.
"What became of Catherine?"
"She left very happy and gay."
"And how are yp~?"
"Happy and shy and rather quiet."
"Too shy for me to kiss you?"
They held each 'other and he could feel himself start to be
whole again. He had not known just how greatly he had been divided and separated because once he started to work he wrote
from an inner core which could not be split ~or even marked
nor scratched. He knew about this and it was his strength since
all the rest of him could be riven.
'. They sat at the bar while the boy laid the table and the first
coolness of faIl was in the breeze from the sea and then sitting
at the table under the pines they felt it again as they ate' and
drank.
"This cool breeze comes all the way from Kurdistan," David
said. "The equinoctial stonns will be coming soon."
"They won't come; today," the girl said. 'We don't have to
worry about them today."
"There hasn't been a blow of any kind since when we met in
Cannes at the cafe."
"Can you still remember things that long ago?"
"It seems further away than the, war."
"I had the war the last three days," the girl said. "I just left it
this morning." 
Ernest Hemingway
"I never think about it," David said.
"Now I've read it," Manta told him, "but I don't understand
about you. You never made clear what you believed."
He filled her glass and then refiIIed his own.
"I didn't know until afterwards," he said. "So I didn't try to act
as though 1 did. I ~uspended thinking' about it while it was hap- pening. I only felt and saw and act~d and thought tactically. That's why it's not a better book. Because I wasn't more intelligent."
.
"It is a very good book. The flying parts are wonderful and the
feeling for the other people and for the planes themselves.;'
"I'm good on other people and on technical and' tactical
things," David said. "I don't mean to talk wet or to brag. But, Marita, nobody knows about himself when h~ is really involved. Yourself isn't worth considering. It would be shameful at the
time."
"But afterwards you know."
"Sure. Sometimes."
"Can I read the narrative?"
David poured wine in the glasses again.
"How much did she tell you?:'
"She said she told me everything. She tells things very well
you know."
"I'd rather you didn't read it," David said. "All it would'do is
make trouble. I didn't know there would be you when I wrote it
and I
c~'t help her telling you things but I don't have to have
you read about them too."
"Then I mustn't read it?"
"I wish you wouldn't. I don't want to give you orders."
"Then I have to teU you," the girl said.
"She let you read it?"
''Yes. She said I should."
"God damn her."
"She didn't do it to do wrong. It was when she was so warned."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
"So you read it all?"
"Yes. It's wonderfuL It's so much better than the last book and
now the stories are so much better than it or than anything." "\\That about the Madrid part?" He looked at her and she
looked up at him and then moistened her lips and did not look
away and she said very carefully, "I knew all about that because
I'm just the way you are."
When they. were lying together Marita said, ''You don't think
about her when you make love to me?"
"No, stupid."
''You don't want me to do her things? Because I know them all
and I can do them."
"Stop talking and just feel."
"} can do them better than she can."
"Stop talking."
"Don;t think you have to-"
"Don't talk."
"B~J.t you don't have to-"
"No one has to but we are-'~
They lay holding each other close and hard and then gently fi- nally and Marita said, "I have to go away but I'll be back. Please
sleep for me." .
She kissed him and when she came back he was asleep. He had meant to wait for her but he had fallen asleep while he waited. She lay down by.him and kissed him and when he did
not wake she lay by him very quietly and tried to sleep too. But
she was not sleepy and she kissed him very softly again and then commenced to play with him very gently while she pushed her breasts against him. He stirred in his sleep and she lay now with her head down below his chest and played softly and search- ingly making small intimacies and discoveries.
It was a long cool afternoon and David slept and when he 
186 Ernest Hemingway
-
woke Marita was gone and he heard the two girls'voices on the
terrace. He dressed and unbolted the door to his working room
and then came out from the door of that room onto the flagstones. There was no one on the terrace except the waiter who
was taking in the tea things and he found the girls in the bar.
Chapter Twenty"three
THE lWO' GIRLS were both sitting at the bar with· a bottle of
Perrier-Jouet in a bucket with ice and they both looked fresh
and lovely.
"It'-s just like meeting an ex-husband," Cathenne said. "It
makes me feel very sophisticated." She had never looked gayer
or more lovely. "I must say it agrees with you." She looked at
David in mock appraisal.
"Do you think he's all right?" Marita said. She looked at David
and blushed.
"And well you might blush," Catherine said. "Look at her,
David." .
"She looks very well," David said. "So do you."
"She looks about sixteen," Catherine said. "She said she told
you about reading the narrative."
"I think you should have asked me," David said.
"I know I should," Catherine said. "But I to read it for
myself and then it was so interesting I thought Heiress ought to
read it too."
"I'd have said no." 
188 -'Ern'est Hemingway
"But the point is," Catherine said, "if he ever says no about
anything, Marita, just keep right on. It doesn't mean a thing."
"I don't believe it," Madta said. She smiled at David.
"That's because he hasn't written the narrative up to date.
When he does you'll find out."
"I'm through with the narrative," David said .
. "That's dirty," Catherine said. 'That was my present and our
project."
''You must write it, David," the girl said. ''You will won't you?"
"She wants to be in it, David," Catherine said. "And it will be
so much better when you have a dark girl too."
David poured himself a glass of the champagne. He saw
Marita look at him, a warning, and he said to Catherine, "I'll go
on with it when I finish the stories. What did you do with your
day?"
"I had a fine day. I made decisions and planned things."
"Oh God," David said.
"They're an straightforward plans," Catherine said. "You don't
have to groan about them. You've been doingjust whatever you
wanted to do all day and 1 was pleased. But I have a right to
make a few plans."
''\Vhat sort of plans?" David asked. His voice sounded very flat.
"First we have to start seeing about getting the book out. I'm
going to have to have the manuscript typed up to where it-is now
and see about -getting illustrations. I have to see the artists and
make the arrangements."
''You've had a very busy day," David said: ''You know, don't you,
that you don't get manuscripts typed until whoever writes them
has gone over them and has them ready for typing?"
"That isn't necessary because I only need a rough draft to
show the artists."
"I see. And if I don't want it copied yet?"
"Don't you want it brought out? I do. And someone has to get
started on something pracJical."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
"Who are the artists you thought up today?"
"Different ones for different parts. Marie Laurencin, Pascen,
Derain, Dufy and Picasso."
"For Christ sake, Derain."
"Can't you see a nice Laurencin of Marita and me in the car
when we stopped the first time by the Loup on the way to Nice?"
"Nobody's written that."
'Well write it then. It's certainly much more interesting and
instructive than a lot of natives in a kraal or whatever you call it
covered with flies and scabs in Central Africa with your drunken
father staggering arotind smelling of sour beer and not knowing
which ones of the little horrors he had fathered."
"There goes the ball game," David said.
"What did you say, David?" Marita said. .
"I said thank you very much for having lunch with me," David
told her.
''Why don't you her for the rest of it?" Catherine said.
"She really must have done something impressive to make you
sleep as though you were dead until the absolute end of the afternoon. Thank her for that at least."
''Thank you for going swimming,"-David said to the girl. _
"Oh did you swim?" Catherine said. "I'm glad you swam."
"We swam quite far," Marita said. "And we had a very good
lunch. Did you have a good lunch, Catherine?"
"I think so," Catherine said-. "I don't remember."
"Where were you?" Marita asked gently.
"Saint Raphael," Catherine said. "I remember stopping there
but i can't remember about lunch. I never notice when I eat by
myself. But I'm quite sure I did have lunch there. I know I intended to."
'Was it-nice driving back?" Marita asked. "It was such a cool
lovely afternoon."
"I don't know," Catherine said. "I didn't notice. 1 was thinking about making the book and getting it started. We have get 
Ernest Hemingway
it started. I don't know why David started to be difficult the mo-
!TIent 1 commenced to put a little order into it. The whole thing
has dragged ,along in such a haphazard way that I was suddenly
ashamed of all of us."
"Poor Catherine," Marita said. "But now that you have it all
planned you must feel better."
"I said. "I felt so happy when I came in. I knew
I'd made you happy and I'd accomplished something practical
too and then David made me feel like an idiot or a leper. I can't
hdp it if I'm practical aQ,d sensible."
"I know, Devil," David said. "I just didn't want to get thework
mixed up."
"But it's you who mixed it up," Catherine said. "Can't you
see? Jumping back and forth trying to write stories when all you
had to do was keep on with the narrative that meant so much to
all of us. It was going so well too and we were just coming to the
most eXciting parts. Someone has to show: you that the stories
are just your way of escaping your duty."
Marita looked at him agftin and he knew what she was trying
to'tell him 'and he said;"1 ,to go get cleaned up. You tell
Marita about it and I'll be back."
"We have other things to talk about," Catherine said. "I'm
sorry 1 was rude about you and Madta. I couldn't be happier
about you really."
David took everything that had been said in with him to the
bathroom where he had a shower and changed into a newly
washed fisherman's sweater and slacks. It was quite cool now in
the evening and Marita was'sitting at the bar looking at Vogue.
"She's gone down to see about your room," Marita said.
"How is she?"
"How should I know, David? She's a very great publisher
now.' She's given up sex. It doesn't interest her anymore. It's
childish really, she says. She doesn't know how it could ever have
meant anything to her. But she may ,decide to have an affair
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 191
with another woman if she ever takes it up again. There's quite
. a bit about another woman,"
"Christ I never thought it would go this way."
"Don't" , Marita said. "No matter what or how it is I love you .
and you are going to tomorrow."
Catherine came in and said, "You look wonderful together
and I'm so proud. I feel as though I'd invented you. Was he good
today, Marita?"
"We had a nice lunch," Marita said. "Prease be fair, Catherme. . "
"Oh I know he's a satisfactory lover," Catherine said. "He's always that. That's just like his martinis or how he swims or skis
or flew probably. I never saw him with a plane. E,veryone says he
was marvelous. It's like acrobats really I suppose and just as
dull. I wasn't asking about that:'
''You were very good to let us spend a day together, Catherine," Marita said.
''You can spend the rest of your lives together," Catherine
said. "If you don't bore each other. I have no further need of either of you."
David was watching her in the mirror and she looked calm,
handsome and normal. He could see Marita looking at her very
sadly.
"I do like to at you though and I'd like to hear you talk if
you'd ever open your mouths." .
"How do you do," said David.
''That was quite a good effort," Catherine said. "I'm very well."
"Have any new plans?" David asked. He felt as though he
were hailing a ship.
"Only what I've told you," Catherine went on. ''They'll"probably keep me quite busy."
"What was all the guff about another woman?"
He felt Marita kick him and he put his foot on hers t6 acknowledge. 
Ernest Hemingway
"That's notguff," Catherine said. "I want to have one more try
to see if I've missed anything. I might have."
"All of us are fallible," David said and Marita kicked him
again.
"I want to see," Catherine said. "I know enough about that
now so I should be able to tell. Don't worry ~b(jut your dark girl. She's not my type at all. She's yours. She's what you like and very nice it is but not for me. I'm not attracted to the gamin type." "Perhaps I am it gamin," Marita said.
"That's a very polite word for that part."
"But I'm also more of a woman than you are Catherine."
"Go ahead and 'show David what sort of gamin you are. He'd like it."
"He knows what sort of woman I am."
"That's splendid,"'Catherine said. "I'm glad you both found
your tongues finally. I do prefer conversation."
"You aren't really a woman at all," Marita said.
"I know it," Catherine said. "I've tried to explain it to David often enough. Isn'fthat true, David?"
David looked at her antI said nothing.
"Didn't I?"
''Yes,'' he said.
"I did try and I broke myself in pieces in Madrid to be a girl and aU it did was break me in pieces," Catherine said. "Now all
I am is through. You're a girl and a boy both and you really are.
You don't have to change and it doesn't kill you and I'm not. And
now I'm nothing. All I wanted was for David and 'you to be happy. Everything.else I invent."
Marita said, "I know it and I try to tell David."
"I know you do. But you don't have to be loyal to me or to any- thing. Don't do it. Nobody would anyway and you probably aren't really. But I tell you not to be. I want you to be happy and make him happy. You can too and I can't and I know it."
THE G.ARDEN OF EDEN
''You're the finest girl there is," Marita said.
"I'Il.l not. I'm finished before I ever started."
193
"No. I'm the one," Marita said. "I was stupid and awful."
"You weren't stupid. Everything you said was true. Let's stop talking and be friends. Can we?"
"Can we please?" Marita asked her.
"I want to," Catheri,ne said. "And not be such a tragic buIIy. Please take your time about the book, David. You know all I
want is for you to write the best you can. That's what we started'
with. I'm over it now whatever this one was."
''You were JUSt tired," David said. "I don't think you ate any lunch either."
"Probably not," Catherine said. "But I may have. Can we forget it all now though and just be friends?"
So they were friends; whatever friends are, David thought, and tried not to think but talked and listened in the unreality that reality had become. He had heard each one speak about the
other and he knew each must know what the other thought and probably what they each had told him. In that way they really
were friends, understanding in their basic disagreement, trusting in their complet~ distrust and enjoying one another's company. He enjoyed their company too but tonight he'd had enough of it.
Tomorrow he must go back into his 0'vVll country; the one that
Catherine was jealous of and that Marita loved and 'respected. He had been happy in the country of the story and knew that it
was too good to last and ~ow he was back from what he cared
about into the overpopulated vacancy of madness that had
taken, now, the new -tum of exaggerated practicality. He was
tired of it and he was tired of Marita's collaborating with her enemy. Catherine was not his enemy except as she was himself in
the unfinding unrealizable quest ,that is love and so was her own
enemy. She needs an enemy so badly always that she has to keep
one near and she's the nearest and the easiest to attack knowing 
'94 Ernest Hemingway
the weaknesses and strengths and all the faults of our defenses.
She turns my flank so skiIIfuIly then finds it is her own and the
last fighting is always in a swirl and the dust that rises is our own
dust.'
Catherine wanted to play backgammon with Marita after
nero They always played it seriously and 'for money and when
Catherine went to the board Marita said to David,
don't come to my room tonight after all."
"Good."
"Do you understand?"
"Let's skip that word," David said. His coldness had come
back as the time for working moved closer.
"Are you angry?"
''Yes,'' David said.
"At me?';
"No."
''You can't be angry with someone who's ill."
''You haven't lived very long," David said. "That's exactly who
everyone is always angry with. Get ill sometime yourself and see."
"I wish you wouldn't be angry."
"I WlS 'hl'd never seen any 0 f " you.
"Please don't, David."
''You know it isn't true. I'm only getting ready to work."
He went into their bedroom and put the reading·light on
his side of the bed and made himself comfortable and read one
of the W H. Hudson books. It was Nature in Dawnland and he
had taken it to read because it had the most unpromising title.
He knew enough to know a time was coming when he'd need all
the books and he was saving the best ones. But once past the
tie of this one nothing in it bored him. He was happy to read and
. he was back out of his life and with Hudson and his brother
riding their horses into the tumbled whiteness of
thistledown in the moonlight and gradually the click of dice and
THE GARDEN OF EDEN '95
the low sound of the girls' voices became real again too so that
when, after a time, he went out to make himself a whiskey and
Perrier to take back to his reading they seemed, when he saw
them playing, to be actual human beings doing something
mal and not figures in some unbelievable play he had been
brought unwillingly to attend.
He went back to the room and read and drank his whiskey
and Perrier very slowly and he had undressed and turned the
light off and was allnost asleep when he heard Catherine come
in to the bedroom. It seemed to him that she was gone a long
time in the bathropm before he felt her' come to bed and he lay
still and breathed steadily and hoped he might really go to sleep.
"Are you awake, David?" she asked.
"1 think so."
"Don't wake up," she said. "Thank you for sleeping here."
"I u.sually do."
''You don't have to."
''Yes I do."
"I'm glad you did. Good night:'
"Good rtight."
'Would you kiss me good night?"
"Sure," he said ..
He kissed her and it was Catherine 'as she had been before
when she had seemed to come back to him for a while.
"I'm sorrY I was such a failure again."
"Let's not talk about things."
"Do you hate me?"
"No."
"Can we start again the way I'd planned things?"
"I don't think so."
''Then why did you come in here?"
"This is where I belong."
"No other reason?" 
Ernest Hemingway
"I thQught you might be lonely."
"I was."
"Everybody's lonely," David said.
"It's terrible to be in bed together and be lonely."
''There isn't any solution," David said. "All-your plans and
schemes are worthless."
"I didn't give it a chance."
"It was all crazy anyway. I'm sick of cra~ things. You're not
the only one gets broken up."
"I know. But can't we try it again just once more and I really - be good? I can. I nearly was."
"I'm sick of all of it, Devil. Sick all the way through me."
'Wouldn't you try it just once more for her and for me both?"
"It doesn't work and I'm sick of it."·
"She said you had a fine day and that you were really cheerful
and not depressed. Won't you try it once more for both of us? I -.
want it so much."
''You want everything so much and when you get it it's
and you don't give a damn."
"I was just overconfident this time and then I get .• i nscdfe".
able. Please can we try it again?"
"Let's go to sleep, Devil, and not talk about it." .
"Kiss me again please," Catherine said. "I'll go to sleep
cause I know you'll do it. You al~ays do everything I want
cause you really want to do it too.;'
''You only want things for you, Devil."
"That's not true, David. Anyway I am you and her. Th,,'<
what I did it for. I'm everybody. You know about that don't
"Gb to sleep, Devil."
"I will. But would you please kiss me again first so that
won't be lonely?"
Chapter Twenty-four
·MORNING he was on the far slope of the mountain again.
elephant was no longer travelling as he had been but was
aimlessly now,· feeding occasionally and David had
nmmth"y '""'e getting dose to him. He tried to remember how
felt. He had no love for the elephant yet. He must re- ,en,h", tl\.t .. He had only a sorrow that had come from his own
",dness that had brought an understanding of ·age. Though eingt()O)IOLmg, he had learned how it must be to be too old. He
lonesome for Kibo and thinking ofJuma killing the elephant's
had tU,rned him against Juma and made the elephant his
He knew then how much it meant to him to have seen
-. _ elephant in the moonlight and for him to have followed him
Kibo and come dose- to him in the clearing so that he had
both of the great tusks. But he did no~ know that nothing
ever be as good as that again. Now he knew they would
elephant and there was nothing he could do about it. He
betrayed the elephant when he had gone back to ten them
'th'''}>arr,ba, They would kill me and they would kill Kibo too 
Ernest Hemingwa_y
if we had ivory, he had thought and known it was untrue. Prob
a-- bly the elephant is going to find where he was born m,w 'an,d they'll kill him there. That's all they'd need to make it pe,efec'" They'd iike to have killed him where they killed.his friend.
would be a big joke. That would have pleased them. The
damned mend killers.
They had moved to the edge of thick cover now and the
phant was close ahead. David could smell him and they all hear him pulling down branches and the snapping that made. His father put his hand on David's shoulder to move
back and have him wait outside and-then he took a big pinch_ ashes from'the pouch in his pocket and tossed it in the
a.sh barely slanted toward them as it fell and his father no,dde~
at Juma and bent down to follow him into the thick cover.
watched their backs and their asses go in and out of sight. could not hear them move.
David had stood still and listened to the elephant feeding. could smell him as strongly as he had the night in the mc)on,iighl when he had worked up close to him and had seen his wo,nd,,,· ful tusks. Then as he stood there it was silent and he could
smell the elephant. Then there had been aa,~h::i~gh~,:,~~:;:i~~ smashing and a shot by, the .303 then the h
report o~ his father's '450, then" the smashing and crashing
gone on going steadily away and he had gone into the
growth and found Juma standing shaken and bleeding from forehead all down over his face and his father white and
"He went for Juma and knocked him over," his father
said. "Juma hit him in the head."
'Wh~re did y'ou hit him?" ,
"Where I fucking weI! could," his father had said. "Get on
fucking blood spoor."
There was plenty of blood. One stream as high as David's
that had squirted bright on trunks and leaves and vines and
other much lower that was dark and foul wilth "to,machcon",nt!
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
.. "Lung and gut shot," his father said. 'We'll find him down or
'"~t::~1~~~1hope the hell," he added.
: ,. him anchored, 'in such ~uffering and despair that could no longer move. He had crashed through the heavy where he had been feeding and crossed a path of open and David and his father had run along the heavily pia,h"d blood trail. Then the elephant.had gone on into thick
and David had seen him ahead standing gray and huge. the trunk of a tree. David could only see his stem and
his father moved ahead of him and ,he followed and they alongside the elephant as though he was a ship and David
,aw 'he blood coming from his flanks· and running down his
and then his father raised his rifle and fired and the ele·
turned his ~ead with the ~eat tusks moving heavy and and looked at them and when his father fired the second
the elephant seemed to sw~y like a felled tree and came
jlla,;hiJlg down toward them. But he was not dead. He had
__ anchored and now he was down with his shoulder broken.
. did not move but hi's eye ~s alive and looked at David. He
long eyelashes and his eye was the most alive thing ia''''',a" ever seen.
,,'~!;hootlli'm in the ear hole with the three oh three," his father
shoot him," David had said.
had come up limping and bloody, the skin of his forehanging down ov~r his left eye, the bone of his nose showand one ear tom and had taken the rifle from David without
pea,kiJ'g and pushed the muzzle almost .into the ear hole and
twice jerking the bolt and driving it forward angrily. The of the elephant had opened wide on the first shot and then
to glaze and blood carrie out of the ear and" ran in two
streams down the wrinkled gray hide. It was a different
blood and David had thought I must remember that and
but it had never been of any use to him. Now all the 
200 Ernest Hemingway
dignity and majesty and all the beauty was gone from the ele- :
phant and he was a huge wrinkled pile.
"Well we got him, thanks to you," his father had said. _,"
"Now we'd better get a fire going so I can put Juma back to- ':
gether again. Come here' you bloody Humpty Dumpty. Those
-tusks will keep." .
Juma had come to him grinning bringing the tail of the
phant that had no hairs on it at all. They had made a dirty joke;
and then his father had begun to speak 'rapidly in Swahili:
far to water? How far will you have to go to get people to
those tusks out of-here? How are you, you worthless old
fucker? What have you broken?
Then with the answers known his father had said, "You and
will go back to get the packs where we dropped them wI,en we
went in after him; Juma can get wood and have tile fire
The medical kit is in my pack. We have to get the packs U«v.-
it's dark. He won't infect. It's not like claw wounds. Let's
His father had known how he had felt abput the
that night and in the next few days he had tried if not
him to hring him back to the hoy he had been before he
come to the knowledge that he hated elephant hunting.
had put no statement of his father's intention, which had
been stated, in the story but had only used the happenings,
disgusts, the events and feelings of the butchering, and the
of chopping out the tusks and of the rough surgery on
disguised by mockery and railery to keep the pain in
and reduce its stature since there were no drugs. The
sponsibility David was given and the trust that Was offered
and not accepted he had put in the story without pointing
significance. He had tried to make the elephant alive be,oea.th Ith
tree anchored in his final anguish and drowning in the
that had flowed so many times before but always ,",unlch.,
and now was rising in him so he could not breathe, the
heart pumping it to drown him as he watched the man who
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 20'
_ to finish him. David had been so protid the elephant had
-scented luma and charged him instantly. He have kiIIed
""_ l uma if his father had not fired into him so that he had thrown
: Juma into the trees with his trunk and charged on with the
. . in him, feeling it as only another wound until the blood
'- welled up and he could not breathe it. That evening as
": David had sat by the fire he had looked atJuma with his stitched
face and his broken ribs that he tried to breathe without and
:: wondered if the elephant had recognized him when he_had tried
._ to kiII him. He hoped he had. The elephant was his hero now as
- had been for a long time and he had thought, I did not
belie,,. he could do it when he was so old and tired. He would
killed Juma too. But he didn't look at me as though he
,wamt"d to kill me. He only looked sad the same way I felt. He
his old friend on the day he died.
It was a very young boy's story, he knew, when he had finished
-He: read it over and saw the gaps he must fill in to make it so
whoever read it would feel it was truly happening as it
and he marked the gaps in the margin.
remembered how the elephant lost all dignity as soon as
eye had ceased to be alive and how when his father and he
returned with the packs the elephanfhad already started to
".eil eve' in the cool evening. There was no more true elephant,
the gray wrinkled sweIling dead body and the huge great
tusks that they had kiIIed him for. The ;u the dried blood and he scraped some of it
his thumbnaH like a dried piece of sealing wax and put it
itl,. flockelt of' hi', shirt. That was alI he took from the elephant
the beginning of the knowledge of loneliness.
Mterthe butchery his father tried to talk to him that night by
was a murderer you know, Davey," he had said.
nobody knows how many people he has killed."
were all trying to kill him weren't they?" 
202 Ernest Hem-ingway
"Naturally," his father had said, "with that pair of tusks."
"How could he be a murderer then?"
"Just as you like," h'is father had said. "I'm sorry you got so
. mixed up about'him."
"I wish he'd killed Juma," David had said.
"I think that's carrying it a little far," his father said. "Juma's
your friend you know."
"Not anymore."
"No need to tell him so."
"He knows it," David had said.
"I think you misjudge him," his father said and they had left
it there. _
Then when they were finally back safely with the tusks after -
all the things that had happened and the tusks were propped
against the wall of the stick and mud house leaning there with'
their points touching, the tusks so tall and thick that no one
could believe them even when they touched them and no one,
not even his father, could reach to the top of the bend where :.
they curved in for the points to meet, there when Juma and
father, and he were heroes and Kibo was a hero's dog, and the.:
men who had carried the tusks were heroes, already V
drunk heroes and to be drunker, his father had said, "
want to make peace Davey?"
"All right," he said because he knew this was the start
never telling that he had decided on.
"I'm so glad," his father said. "It's so much simpler an,j b"ttex."··
Then they sat on old men's stools under the sha4e of the
fig tree with the tusks against the wall of the hut and drank
tive beer from gourd cups that were brought by a young girl
her younger brother, no longer a detested nuisance but t4e
vant of heroes, sitting in the dust by the heroic dog of a
who held an old cockerel newly promoted to the ,""ndin!! 0" the'
heroes' favorite rooster. They sat there and drank beer while
big drum started and the Ngoma began to build ..
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 203
He came out of the working room and he was happy and
, and proud and Marita was waiting for him on the terrace
.. in the sun of the bright early fall morning that he had not
existed. It was a perfect morning, still and cool. The sea
.b"lo'w v'a, a flat calm and across. the bay was the white curve of
;Camae" wiitt the dark mountains behind it.
"I love you very much," he said to the dark girl as she stood
. He put his arms around her and kissed her and she said,
finished it."
"Sure," he said. "\Vhy not?"
"I love you and I'm so proud," she said. They walked out and
;l .. ,k"d at the sea with their arms around each other.
. "How are you girl?"
"I'm very well and very happy," Marita said. "Did you mean it
laving me or was it just the morning?"
"It was the morning," David said and kissed her again.
"Can I read the story?"
"It's too lovely a day/'
: "Can't I read it so I can feel like you do and not just happy be-
", you're happy like I was your dog?"
gave her the key and when she brought the notebooks and
the at the bar David read it sitting beside her. He
mannered and stupid. He had never done this bewith anyone and it was against everything he believed
writing but he did not think of that except at the moment
he put his arm around the girl and looked at the writing
n Ute lim,d ],ap'''. He could not help wanting to read it with her
he could not help sharing what he had shared and'
he had believed could not and should not be shared.
.; When she finished reading Marita put her arms around David
. Jdssed him so hard that she drew blood from his lip. He
her and tasted his blood absentmindedly and smiled.
, sorry David." she said. "Please forgive me. I'm so very
and prouder than you are." 
204 Ernest Hemingway
"Is it all right?" he said. "Can you smell-the shamba smell and
the clean smell of hut inside and feel the smoothness of the old
men chairs? It's really clean in the hut and the earth floor'
swept."
"Of course it is. You had it in the other story. 1 can see the angie of the head of Kibo the heroic dog too. You were such .a
l!)vely hero. Did the blood make a stain in your pocket?"
"Yes. It softened when I sweated."
"Let's go to town and celebrate the day," Marita,said. 'The"e"····
a 10,t of things that we can do today."
David stopped at the bar and poured Haig Pinch and then,
cold Perrier into a glass and brought it with him to the room
where he drank half of it and took a cold shower. Then he pulled :'
on -slacks and a shirt and put on alpargatas to go into town. He "
felt the story was good and felt even better about Marita. Neither had be'en diminished by the sharpening of perception he ",
had and clarity had come with no
Catherine was doing whateve:r she was doing and would
whatever she would do. He' looked out and felt the old
carelessness. It was a day for flying actually. He wished
was a field where he could rent a plane and take Marita .. r,q
show her what you could do with a day like this. She might
it. But there isn't any field here. So forget that. It would be
though. So would skiing. That's only two months away if
want it. Christ, it was good to finish today and have her
Marita there with no damned jealousy of the work and have
know what you were reaching for and how far you went. She
ally knows and it's not faked.·} do love her and you make a
of it, whiskey, and you witness it for me, Perrier old boy old
rier, I have been faithful to you, Perrier, in my fuckiin!: f",hior,,,
It feels very good when. you feel so good. It's a stupid f .. ,lirlg.I,u
it fits on this day so put it on.
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 205
"Come girl," he said to Manta at'the door of her room
_ holding you up besides your beautiful legs?" '"'
. "I'm ready, David," she said. She had on a tight sweater and
. and. her face was spining. She brushed her dark hair and
at him.
"It's wonderful when you're so gay."
"It's such a good day," he said. "And we're so lucky."
think so?" she said as they walked to the car: "Do you
we're really luckv?" .
"Yes," he said. "I think it changed this morning or maybe
night." 
BOOK FOUR 
Chapter Twenty-five
'C,nilmJr<E'S CAR was in the driveway of the hotel they
up. Ii was parked on the right side of the gravelled ap-
)'o',en. David stopped the Isotta behind it and he and Manta
out and walked down the drive past the small, low empty
car and onto flagstones of the walk without speaking.
;, They passed David's room with the locked door and the open
and Marita stopped outside of her door and said,
"Goo,jbye."
"\\That are you doing this afternoon?" he asked.
don't know," she said. "I'll be here."
" He walked on down to the patio of the hotel and went in the
door. Catherine was sitting at the bar reading the Paris
with a glass and half a bottle of wine beside her on the
She looked up at him.
- "What brought you back?" she asked.
had lunch in town and came on up," David said. 
2<0 Ernest Hemingway
"} haven't one yeL"
"I mean the one you write the stories for."
"Oh. The stories."
"Yes. The stories. The dreary'dismal little stories about your; - adolescence with - your bogus drunken father."
"He wasn't so bogus really."
"Didn't he defraud his wife and all his friends?"
"No. Just himselfreally."
"You certainly make him despicable in these last sketches or .
vignettes or pointless anecdotes you write about him."
''You mean the stories."
''You caII them stories," Catherine said.
''Yes,'' David said and poure~ a glass of the lovely cold wine on
the bright clear day in the pleasant, sunny room in the clean;
comfortable hotel and, sipping it, felt it fail to lift up his dead ,
cold heart.
"Would you. like me to go and get I1eiress?" Catherine
"It wouldn't do to have her think
th~t we'd had a miisund,,,· standing about whose day it is or that we'd taken up solitruy , drinking together."
"You don't need to get her."
"I'd like to. She took care of you .today and I didn't. RealI., :
David, I'm not a bitch yet. I just act and talk like one."
While David waited for Catherine to come back he drank
other glass of the champagne and read the Paris edition -''" ..
New York Herald she had left on the bar. Drinking the wine
himself it did not taste the same and -he .found a cork in
kitchen to stop up the bottle before he put it back in the
chest. But the bottle did not feel heavy enough and lifting. it - against the light that came in the west window he saw how
tIe wine was left and he poured it out and drank it off and
the bottle down on the tiled floor. Even when he drank it
qUicldy it did nothing for him.
THE GARDEN -OF EDEN
Thank God he was breaking through on the stories now.
:Wha' h"d made the last book good was the people who were in
and the accuracy' of the detail which made it believable. He
really, only to remembe~ accurately and the form came by'
he would choose to leave out. Then, of course, he. could
it like the diaphragm of a camera and intensify it so it
NUld be concentrated to the point where the heat shone bright
the smoke began to rise. He knew that he was getting
now.
What Catherine had said about the stories when she was trying ,0 h,ur': him had started him thinking about his father and all the
he had tried to do whatever he could about. Now, he told
h~:s~,~:.~;must try to grow up again and face what you have to
f~ being irritable or hurt t6at someone did not under~
and appreciate what you wrote. She understands it less
less. But you've worked well and nothing can touch you as
you can work. Try to help her now and forget about youryou have the story to go over and to make perfect.
. But David did not want to think about the story. He cared
. the writing more than about anything else, and he cared
many but he knew that when he was doing it he
it nodinger it nor handle it any more than
would open up the door of the darkroom to see how a nega~
was developing. Leave it alone, he told himself. You are a
hut you know that much.
thoughts turned to the two girls and he wondered if he
go find -them and see what they wanted' to do or if th~y
to go off and swim. After all, it was Marita's and his day she might be waiting. Maybe something could still be salout of the day for all of them. They might be cooking
~metb,;ng up. He ought to go by and ask what they wanted to
Then do 'it, he told himself. Don"t stand here and think
it. Go on and find them. 
212 Ernest Hemingway
The door to Marita's room was shut and he knocked on it.
They had been talking and when he knocked the talking
stopped.
"Who is it?" Marita asked.
He heard Catherine laugh and she said, "Come in whoever
you are."
He heard Manta say something to her and Catherine said"
"Come in, David."
He opened the door. They were lying in the big bed together
side by side; the sheet pulled up under their chins.
come in, David," Catherine said. 'We've been waiting
for you."
David looked,at them, the serious dark girl and the fair laughing one. Manta looked at him trying to tell him something.
Catherine was laughing.
'Won't you come in too, David?"
"I came by to see if y.ou wanted to go to swim or anything,"
David said.
"I don't want to," Catherine said. "Heiress was in bed asleep
and I got into bed with her. She was very good and asked me to
leave. She's not a bit unfaithful to you. Not in the least little bit.
But won't you come in too so we can both be faithful to you?"
"No," David said.
"Please, David," Catherine said. "It's such a lovely day."
"Do you want to to swim?" David asked Marita.
"I'd like to," the girl said above the sheet.
''You two puritans," Catherine said. "Please both be reasonable and come to bed David."
"I want to go to swim," Marita said. "Please go .out, David."
"\Vhy can't he see you?" Catherine asked. "He sees you at the
beach." .
"He'll see me at the cove," Marita said. "Please go out, David."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
David went out and closed the door without looking back,-
hearing Marita talking in a low voice to Catherine and Catherine's laughter. He walked down the to the front of the
hotel and looked out at, the sea. There was a light breeze now
and he watched three French destroyers and a cruiser, neat and
and sharply etched on the sea as they moved in formation working out some problems. They were far out and they
looked to be recognition silhouetfes from their size until a white
line would show at the bow as a ship speeded up to change the
pattern. David watched them until the two girls came up to him.
"Please don't be cross," Catherine said.
They were dressed to go to the beach and Catherine a bag
with the towels and the robes on an iron chair.
"Are" you going swimming too?" David said to, her.
"If you're not angry with me."
David said nothing and watched the ships as they changed
course and another destroyer moved out of the pattern at a
sharp angle with the line of white curling back her bows,
She began to :<:moke and it trailed in a black widening
plume as she curved at flank speed.
"It was only ajoke," Catherine said. "We'd been making such
good You and I had."
'What are. they dOing, David?" Marita asked.
"Anti-sub maneuvers, I think," he" said. "Maybe there are
subs working with them. They're probably out from Toulon"."
"They were in "Sainte Maxime or Saint Raphael," Catherine
said. "I saw them. the other day."
"I don't know what it is now with the "smoke screen," David
said. "There must be other ships we c"an't see."
"There come the planes," Marita said. "Aren't they lovely?"
They were very small, neat sea-planes and three of them were
coming around the point -low over the water. 
214 Ernest Hemingway
"When we were here in the early summer they had gunnery
practice off the Porquerolles and it was terrific," Catherine said.
"It shook the window. Will they use depth bombs now, David?"·
"I don't know. I shouldn't think so if they're working with feal
subs."
"I can go to swim, can't I please David?" Catherine asked.
''I'm going away then you can swim all the time by yourselves."
"I asked you to swim," David said.
"That's true," Catherine said. "You did. Then let's go now and
all be friends and happy. If the planes come in close they can see
us on the beach at the cove and that will cheer them up."
The planes did come by close off the cove while David and
Marita were swimming far 'out and Catherine was tanning on
the beach. They passed rapidly, three echelons of three, their
big Rh6ne motors roaring suddenly as they flew over then dying
away as they went toward Sainte Maxime.
David and Marita swam back in to the beach and sat on the
sand by'Catherine.
"They never even Iboked at me," Catherine said. "They mllst
be very serious boys."
"What did you expect? Aerial photography?" David asked her.
Marita had said very little since they had left the hotel and
she said nothing to this.
"It was fun when David really did live with me," Catherine
said to her. "1 can remember when 1 liked everything that David
did. You must try to like his things too, Heiress. That is if he has
any left."
"Do you have any left, David?': Marita'asked.
"He traded everything he had in on those stories," Catherine
said. "He used to.have so many things. I certainly hope you like
st<?ries, Heiress."
"I like them," Marita said. She did not look at David but he
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
saw her serene dark face and sea wet hair and smooth lovely
skin and beautiful body as she sat looking out at the sea.
''That's good," Catherine said lazily and a long deep lazy
breath as she stretched out on the beach robe on the sand that
was still warm from the afternoon sun. "Because that's what
you're going to get. He used to do so many things too and he did
them all so beautifully. He had a wonderful life and all he thinks
about now isAfiica and his drunken father and his press cuttings.
His clippings. Has he ever shown you his clippings, Heiress?"
"No, Catherine," Marita said:
"He wiIl," Catherine said. "He tried to show them to me once
at Ie Grau du Rpi but I put a stop to that. There were hundr!'!ds
,of them and every one, almost, had his picture and they were all
the same pictures. It's worse than' carrying around obscene
postcards really. I think he reads them by himself and is unfaithful to me with them. In a wastebasket probably. He always
has a wastebasket. He said himself it was the most important
thing for a writer-"
"Let's go in and swim, Catherine," Marita said. "I think I'm
getting cold."
"I mean the wastebasket was the most important thing for a
writer," Catherine said. "I used to think I ought to get him a really wonderful one that would be worthy of him. But he never
puts anything he writes in the wastebasket. He writes in those
ridiculous child's notebooks and he doesn't throw.anything
away. He just crosses things out and writes along the sides of the
pages. The whole business is a fraud really. He makes mistakes
in spelling and grammar too. Did you know, Marita, that he
doesn't even really know grammar?"
"Poor David," Marita said. ,
"Of course his French is worse," Catherine said. ''You've never
seen him try to write it. He fakes along well enough in conversation and he's amusirigwith his slang. But actually he's illiterate." 
Hemingway
"Too bad," said David.
"I thought he was wonderful," Catherine said, "until I found
he couldn't write even a simple note correctly. But then you'll be
able to wiite in French for him."
"Ta gueule, " David said cheerfully.
"He's good at that s,?rt of thing," Catherine said. "Quick tags
of slang that are probably outdated before he knows it. He
speaks very idiomatic French but he can't write it at all. He's really illiterate, Marita, and you have to face it. His handwriting is
terrible. too. He can't write like a gentleman nor speak like one
in any language. Especially not his own."
"Poor David," Manta said.
"i can't'say I've given him the best years of my life," Catherine said. "Because I've only lived with him since March !.think
it was, but I've certainly given him the best months of my life.
The ones I've had the most fun in anyway and he certainly made
them fun too. I wish it hadn't ended in complete disillusion too
but what are you.to do if you discover the man is illiterate and
practices solitary vice in a wastebasket full of clippings from
something called The Original Romeike's, whoever they are.
Any girl would be discouraged and frankly I'm not going to put
up with it."
"You take the clippings and burn them," David said. "That
would be the soundest thing. Wouldn't you like to go in now and
swim, Devil?"
Catherine looked at him slyly.
"How did you know I did it?" she asked.
"Did what?"
"Burned the clippings."
"Did you, Catherine?" Marita asked.
"Of course I did," Catherine said.
David stood looking at her. He felt completely hollow. It was
like coming around, a curve on a mountain road and the road not
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 217
being there and only a gulf ahead. Marita was standing now too.
Catherine was looking at them her face calm and reasonable,
"Let's go in and swim," Marita said. 'We'll just swim out to
the point and back."
"I'm glad you're being pleasant finally," Catherine said. "I've
been wanting to go in for a long time. It's really getting quite
cool. We forget it's September." 
Chapter Twenty-six
THEY DRESSED ON TI-IE BEACH and dimbed up the steep.traiI with
- David carrying the bag with the beach things to where the old
car was waiting in the pine woods. They got in and David drove
back to the hotel in the early evening light. Catherine was quiet in the car and to anyone passing them they might have been returning from any afternoon at one of the unfrequented beaches of the Esterel. The war ships were no longer in sight when they left the car on the driveway, and the sea beyond the pines was blue and calm. The evening was as beautiful and dear as the morning had been. .
They walked down to the entrance of the hotel and David
took the bag with the beach things into the storeroom and put it down.
"Let me take them," Catherine said. "They ought to go to dry."
"I'm sony," David said. He turned at the door of the storeroom
and walked out and then down to his work room at the end of the
hotel. Inside the room he opened the big Vuitton suitcase. The
pile of cahiers that the stories had been written in was gone. So
.: ---
THE GAR DEN 0 FED E N 219
were the four bulky envelopes from the bank. that had contained
the press clippings. The pile of cahiers with the narrative written
in them were intact. He dosed and locked the suitcase and
searched all of the drawers in the armoire and searched the
room. He had not believed that the stories could be gone. He had
not believed that she could do it. At the beach he had known that
she might have done it but it had seemed impossible and he had
not really believed it. They had been calm and careful and restrained about it as you were trained to be in danger or emergency or in disaster but it had not see!l1ed possible that it could
really have happened.
Now he knew. that it had happened but still thought it might be some ghastly joke. So, empty and dead in his heart, he re-
.opened the suitcase and checked it and after he locked it he
checked the room again.
Now there was no danger and no emergency. It. was only disaster now. But it couldn't be. She must have hidden them
someplace. They could be in the storeroom, or in their own
room, or she could have put them in Marita's room. She couldn't
really have destroyed them. No one could do that to a fellow human being. He still could ·not believe that she had done it but he
felt sick inside himself when he closed and locked the door.
The two iirls· were at the bar when David came in. Marita
looked up at him and saw how things were and Catherine
watched him come in by looking at the mirror. She did not look
at him, only at his reflection in the mi~r.
"Where did you put them, Devil?" David asked.
She turned away from the mirror and looked at him. "I won't
tell you," she said. "I took care "Of them."
"I wish you'd tell me," David said. "Because I need them very much."
"No, you don't," she said. 'They were worthless and 1 hated
them." 
220 Ernest Hemingway
"Not the 'one a,bout Kibo," David said. ''You loved Kibo. Don't
you remember?"
"He had to go too. I was going to tear him out and keep him
but I couldn't find him. Anyway you said he was dead."
David saw Madta look at her and look away. Then she looked
back. "Where did you burn them, Catherine?"
"I won't teU you either," Catherine said. "You're part of the
same thing."
"Did you bum them with the clippings?" David asked.
. "I won't tell you," Catherine said. ''You talk to me like a po- liceman or at school."
''TeII me, Devil. I only want to know."
"I paid for then:l," Catherine said. "I paid the money to do them.'"
"I know," David said. "It was very genero~s of you. Where did
you bum them, Devil?"
"I won't tell her."
"No. Just teU me."·
"Ask her to' go away."
"I reaJly have to go an}'\'/8y," Marita said. "I'll see you later, Catherine. "
"That's good," Catherine said. "It wasn't your fault, Heiress."
David sat on the tall stool by Catherine and she looked in the
mirror and watched Marita go out of the room.
"Where did you burn them, Devil?" David asked. ''You can tell
me now."
"She wouldn't understand," Catherine said. "That's why I wanted her to go."
"I know," said David. ''Where did you burn them, Devil?"
"In the iron drum with holes that Madame uses to bum
trash," Catherine said.
"Did everything burn up?"
''Yes. I poured on some petrol from a bidon in the remise. It
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 221
made a big fire and everything burned. I did it for you, David,
and for all of us."
"I'm sure you did," David said. "Did everything burn?"
"Oh yes. We can go out and look if you like but it isn't necessary. The paper all burned black and I stirred it up with a stick."
"I'll just go out and have a look," David said.
"But you'll be back," Catherine saId.
"Sure," David said.
The burning had been in the trash burner which was'a fanner
fifty-five-gallon gasoline drum with holes punched in it. The
stick used to stir the ashes, and stiH freshly blackened on one
end
,
was an old broom handle which had been used in this capacity before. The bU:1On was in the st~ne shed' and contained
kerosene. In the dn,rm were a few identifiable charred bits of the
green covers of the cahiers, and David found_s,:raps of burnt
newsprint and two charred bits of pink paper which he identified as those used by the Romeike's clipping service. On one he
could distinguish the Providence RI dateline. The ashes had
been well stirred but there would doubtless have been more unburned or charred material if he had cared to sift or examine
them patiently. He tore the pink paper with Providence RI
printed on it into small pieces and dropped them in the fonner
gasoline drum which he had replaced in an upright position. He
reflected that he had never been in Providence, Rhode Island,
and replacing the broom handle in the stone shed, where he noticed the presence of his racing' bicycle, the tires of which
needed inflation, he reentered the kitchen of the hote~, which
was empty, and proceeded to the salon where he joined his wife
Catherine at the bar.
'Wasn't it just the w~y I said?" Catherine asked.
''Yes,'' David said and sat down on one of the stools and put
his elbows on the bar.
"It probably would have been enough to burn the clippings," 
222 Krnest Hemingway
Catherine said. "But I really thought I ought to make a dean
sweep."
''You did, aU right," David said.
"Now you can go right on with the narrative and there will be
nothing to interrupt y/?u. You can start in the morning."
"Sure," David said.
"I'm glad you're reasonable about it," Catherine said. ''You
couldn't know how worthless they were, David. I had to show
you. " '
''You couldn't have kept the Kibo one that you liked?"
"I told you I tried to find it. But if you want to rewrite it I can
tell it to you word for word."
''That will be fun."
"It will be really. You'll see'. Do you want me to' it to you
now? We cou!d if you want."
"No," David said. "Not just now. Would you write it though?"
"I can't write things, David. You know that. But I can tell it to
you anytime you want. You don't really care about the others do
you? They were worthless."
"Why did you do it reail
y?"
"To help you. You can go to Africa and write them again when
your viewpoint is more mature. The country can't be changed
very much. 1 think it would be nice if you wrote about Spair:t instead though. You said the country was almost the same 'as
. Africa and there you'd have the advantage of a civilized language."
David poured himself.a whiskey and found a bottle of Perrier,
uncapped it and poured some in the glass. He remembered the
day they had passed the place where they bottled Perrier water
on the plain on the way to Aigues Mortes and how-"Let's not
talk about writing, tJ he said to Gatherine.
"I like to," Catherine said. 'When it's constructive and has
some valid purpose. You always wrote so well until you started
THE GAR DEN' 0 FED E N
those stories. The thing.was the dirt and the and the
cruelty and the bestiality. You seemed almost.to grovel in it. That
. horrible one about the massacre in the crater and the heartlessness of your own father."
"Can we not talk about them?" David asked.
"I want to talk about them," Catherine said. "I want to make
'you realize why it was necessary to bum them."
"Write it out," David said. "I'd rather not hear it now,"
"But I can't write things, David."
''You will," David said,
"No. But I'll tell them to someone who can write them,"
Catherine said. "If you were friendly you'd write them for me. If
you really loved me you'd be happy to."
"All I want to do IS kill you," David said. "And the only reason
1 don't do it is because you are crazy."
''You can't talk to me like that, David."
"No?"
"No, you can't. You can't. Do you hear me?"
"I hear you."
"Then hear me say you can't say such things. You can't say
horrible things like that to me."
"I hear you," David said,
''You can't say such things. I won't stand for it. I'll divorce you."
''That would be very welcome."
''Then I'll stay married to you and never give you a divorce,"
''That would be pretty."
"I'll do anything I want to you."
''You have."
"I'll kill you."
"I wouldn't give a shit," David said.
''You can't even talk like a gentleman at a time like this."
''\Vhat would a gentleman say at a time like this?"
''That he was sorry." 
Ernest Hemingway
"All right," David said. "I'm sony. i'm sorry I ever met you. I'm
sorry I ever married
"So am I."
"Shut up please. You can tell it to somebody who can write it
down. I'm sorry your mother ever 'met your father and that they
ever. made you. I'm sorry you were born and that you grew up.
I'm sorry for everything we ever did good or bad---'''
"You're. not."
"No," he said. "I'll shut up. I didn't mean to make a speech."
''You're just reany sorry for yourself."
"Possibly," David said. "But shit, Devil, why did you have to
bum them? The stories?"
"I had to, David," she said. "I'm sorry' if you don't understand:"
He had understood really before he had asked her the question and the question had been, he realized, a rhetorical one. He
disliked rhetoric and distrusted those who used it and he' was
ashamed to have fallen into it. He drank the whiskey and Perrier
slowly while he thought how untrue it was that everything that
was understood was forgiven and he tightened his own discipline as conscientiously as he would have worked in the old days
with the mechanic and armorer going over the plane, the engine and his guns. It was not necessary then because they did the
work.perfectly but'it was one way of not thinking, and it was, to
use a.wet word, comforting. Now it was necessary because what
he had said to Catherine about killing her he had. said quite truly
and not rhetOrically. He was ashamed of the speech which had
followed the statement. But there was nothing he couId do
about the statement which was truly made except tighten his
discipline so that he would have it in case he began to lose
control. He poured himself another whiskey and put in Perrier
TH·E GARDEN OF EDEN
again and watched the small bubbles form and break. God damn
her to hell, he thought.
"I'm sorry to be stuffy," he said. "I unde,rstand of course."
"I'm so glad, David," she said. "I'm going away in the mornmg. . "
"Where?"
"To Hendaye and then to Paris to see about artists for the
book."
"Really?"
''Yes. I think I should. We've wasted time as it is and today I
'made so much progress that I just need to keep on."
"How are you going?"
'With the Bug."
''You shouldn't drive alone,"
"I want to."
''You shouldn't, Devi"!. Really. I couldn't let you."
"Can I go on the train? There's one to Bayonne. I can rent a
car there or in Biarritz."
"Can we ta,lk about it in the morning?"
"} want to talk it now."
''You shouldn't go, Devil."
"I'm going," she said. ''You're not going to stop me."
"I'm only thinking about the best way."
"No, you're not. You're trying to stop me."
"If you wait we'll go together."
"I don't want to go together. I want to go tomorrow and in the
Bug. If you don't agree I'll go by train. You can't stop anyone
from going on the train. I'm of age and because I'm married to
you doesn't me your slave or your chattel. I'm going and
you can't stop me."
"Will you be coming back?"
"I plan to." 
226 Ernest Hemingway
"I see."
''You don't see but it dOE7sn't Il)ake any difference. This is a reasoned and coordinated project. These things aren't just tossed
off-"
"Into a wastehasket," David said and remembered the discipline and sipped the whiskey and Perrier.
"Are you going to see your lawyers in Paris?" he asked.
"If I have any business with them. I usually see my lawyers.
Just becallse you don't have any lawyers doesn't mean
else doesn't have to see their lawyers. Do you want my lawyers
to do anything for you?"
"No/' David said. "Fuck your lawyers."
"Do you have plenty of money?"
"I'm quite all right on money."
"ReaIIy, David? Weren't the stories worth a lot? It's bothered
me terribly arid I, know my responsibility. I'll find out and do exactly what I should."
''You'll what?"
"Do exactly what I should."
''Just what is it you propose to do?"
"I'll have their value determined and I'll have twice that paid
into your bank." '
"Sounds very generous," David ''You were always generous."
"I want to be just, David, and it's possible that they were
worth, financially, much more than theywouJd be appraised at."
"Who appraises these things?"
"There must he people who do. There are people who appraise everything."
"What sort of people?"
"I wouldn't know, David. But I can imagine such people as
the editor of the'Atlantic Monthly, Harper's, La Nouvelle Revue
Frarlfaise. "
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 227
"I'm going out. for a while,".David said. "Do you feel all right?"
"Except for the fact that I feel I've probably done a great
wrong to you that I must try to set right I feel very well," Catherine said. ''That was one reason I was going to P<iris. I didn't want
to tell you."
"Let's not discuss casualties," David said. "So you want to go
on the train?"
"No. I-want to go in the Bug."
"AIl right. Go in the Bug. Just drive carefully and don't pass
on hills."
"I'll drive the way you taught me and I'II pretend you're with
me all the time and talk to you .and tell us stories and make up
stories about how I saved your life. I always make those up. And
with you it will all seem so much shorter and effortless and the
speed won't seem fast. I'm going to have fun."
"Good," said David. "Take it as easy as you can. Sleep at
Nimes the first night unless you get off early. They know us at
the Imperator."
"I thought I'd get to Carcassonne."
"No, Devil, please."
"Perhaps I can get off early and make Carcassonne. I'd go by
Aries and Montpellier and not lose time by Nimes."
"If you get offJate stop at Nimes."
"It seems so babyish," she said.
"I'll drive with you;" he said. "I should."
"No, please. It's important that I do this by myself. It really is.
I wouldn't have'you."
"All right," he said. "But I ought to go."
"Please don't. You must. have confidence in me, David. I'll
drive carefully and I'll drive it right straight thro':Igh."
"You couldn't, Devil. It gets dark early now."
''You mustn't worry. You're sweet to let me go," Catherine
said. "But you always did. If I did anything I shouldn't I hope 
Erne-st Hemingway
you can forgive me. I'll miss _you terribly. I miss you already.
Next time we'll drive it
''You've had a very busy day," David said. "You're tired. At least
let me run your Bugatti down to' town and back and give it a
check."
He stopped at Marita's door and said, "Do you want to go for
a ride?"
''Yes,'' she said.
"Come on then," he told her.
Chapter: Twenty-seven
DAVID GOT INTO TIlE CAR and Marita climbed in beside him and
he put the car at a stretch of road where the sand drifted across
from the beach and then throttled back and held it in, watching
the papyrus grass ahead on his left and the empty beach and the
sea on his right as he saw the black road ahead. He put the car
at the road again until he saw the white painted bridge coming
at him fast then held ·his speed as he calculated the distance,
raised his foot from the throttle and pumped the brakes gently.
She was steady and lost momentum at each pump with no devi·
ation and no binding. He brought the car to a stoop before the
bridge, downshifted and then put her at the road again in a ris·
ing disciplined snarl along the N.6 to Cannes.
"She burned them all," he said.
"Dh David," Marita said and they drove on into _Cannes
where the lights were on now and David stopped the car under
the trees in front of the cafe where they. had 6rst met.
"Wouldn't you rather go somewhere else?" Marita asked;
"I don't care," David said. "It doesn't make a hell of a lot of dif·
ference." 
Ernest Hemingway
"If you'd rather just drive,!' Marita offered.
"No. I'd rather cool out," David said. "I just wanted to see if the car was in shape for her to drive it.'"
"She's going?"
"She says so."
They were sitting at the table on the terrace in the dappled shadow of the leaves of the trees. The waiter had brought Marita a TIo Pepe and David a whiskey and Perrier.
"Do you want me to go with her?" Marita said.
''You don't reaIIy think anything will happen to her?"
"No, David. I think she's done her damage for a while."
"Could be," David said. "She burned every fucking thing ex- cept the narrative. The stuff about her." .
"It's a ,wonderful narrative," Marita said.
"Don't buck me up," David said. "I wrote _it and I wrote what
she burned. Don't give me the stuff they feed the troops." ''You can write ther:n again."
"No," David told her. ''When it's right you can't remember.
Every time you read it again it comes f!s a great and unbelievable
. surprise. You can't believe-you did it. When it's once right you
never can do it again. You only do. it once for each thing. And you're only allowed so many in your life."
"So many what?"
"So many good ones."
"But you can remember them. You must."
"Not me and not you and not anybody. They're gone. Once I get them right they're gone."
"She was wicked to you."
"No," David said.
"What then?"
"Hurried," David .said. "Everything today was because she
was hurried really."
"I hope you'll be as kind to me."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
"You just stay around and help me not to kill her. You know
what she's going to do don't you? She's going to pay me for the stories so that 1 won't lose anything."
"No."
''Yes she is. She's going to have her la\'J)'ers have them ap- praised in some fantastic Rube Goldberg tnanner and then she's
going to payme double the appraisal price."
"Truly, David, she didn't say that."
"She said it and it's infinitely sound. Only the details need
working out and what's more the doubling of the appraisal or whatever makes it generous and gives her pleasure."
''You can't let her drive alone, David."
"I know it."
"What are you going to do?"
"I don't know. But let's sit here for a little while," David said.
"There isn't any hurry now. I think she's probably tired and gone
to sleep. I'd like to go to sleep too, with yoli, and wake up and find the stuff all there and not gone and go to work again."
"We will sleep and someday when you wake up you'll work as
wonderfully as you did this morning."
''You're awfully good," David said. "But you certainly got into
a fine lot of trouble when you came- in here that night, didn't
you?"
"Don't try to put me outside," Marita s~id. "} know what I got into."
"Sure," said David. "We both know. Do you want another
drink?"
"If you do," Madta said and then, "I didn't know it was a battle when I came."
"Neither did I."
"With you it'~ "really only you against time."
"Not the time that's Catherine's."
"Only because her time is different. She's panicked by it. You 
Ernest Hemingwa.y
said tonight that all of today was only hurry. That wasn't true but
it was perceptive. And you won so well over time for so long."
Very much later he called for the waiter anq paid for the drinks
and left a good tip and he had started the car and put on the
Iigi)ts and was letting out the clutch when what had really happened came back to him again. It was back as clear and unblurred as when he had first looked into the trash burner and
seen the ashes that had been stirred by the broomstick. He
pushed his headlights carefully· out through the quiet and empty
evening of the town and fonowed them along the port onto the.
road. He felt Manta's shoulder by him and hean;! her say, "I
know, David. It hit me too."
"Don't let it."
"I'm glad it did. There's nothing to do but we'll do it."
"Good."
'We'IJ really do it. Tei et moi."
Chapter Twenty-eight
AT THE HOTEL Madame came in from the kitchen when David
and Marita came into the main room. She had a letter in her hand.
"Madame took the train for Biarritz," she said. "She left this
letter for Monsieur."
"When did she go?" David asked.
"Immediately after Monsieur and Madame left," Madame
Aural said. "She sent the boy to the station for the ticket and to
reserve a wagon-lit. ,!
David began reading the letter.
"What would you eat?" Madame said. "Some cold chicken
and a salad? An omelette to start. There's lamb too if Monsieur
would rather. What would he like, Madame?"
l\1arita and Madame Aural were talking together and David
finished reading the letter. He put it in his pocket and looked at
Madame Aurol. "Did she seem herself when she left?"
"Perhaps not, Monsieur."
"She'll be back," David said.
''Yes, Monsieur." 
r n est Hem i'n g way
"We will take good care of her."
''Yes, Monsieur. ': She began to cry a little as she turned the
omelette and David put his arm around her and kissed her. "Go
and talk to Madame," she said, "and let me set the table. Aural
and the boy are at Napoule, mixing belote and politics."
"I'll set it," JV:larita said. "Open the win.e, David, please. Don't
you think we should have a bottle of the Lanson?"
He closed the door of the ice chest and holding the cold bottle untwisted the seal and loosened the wire and then carefully
moved the cork between his thumb and first finger feeling the
pinch of metal cap against his thumb and the long cold rounded
promise of the bottle. He brought the cork out gently and
poured three glasses full. Ma9:ame stood back frOm the stove
with her glass and they all raised their glasses. David did not
know what to drink to so he said the first words that came which
were, "A'nous et ii: la lihem."
They alI drank and then Madame served the omelette and
they, all drank again without making a toast.
"Eat, David, please," Marita said.
"All right," he said and drank some of the wine and ate some
of the omelette slowly.
"Just eat a little," Marita said. "It will be. good for you."
Madame looked at Marita and shook her head. "Nothing is
helped by your not eating," Madame told him.
"Sure," said David and ate slowly and carefully and drank the
champagne that was born new each time he poured a glass.
"Where did she leave the car?" he asked.
"At the station," Madame said. "The boy rode down with her.
He brought back the key. It's in your room."
"Was the wagon-lit crowded?"
"No. He put her aboard. There were very few passengers. She
will have a place."
"It's not a bad train," David said.
.' .
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 235
"Eat some chiCken," Madame said, "and drink some more
wine. Open another bottle. Your women are thirsty .too."
"I'm not thirsty," Marita said.
''Yes, you are," Madame said. "Drink up now and take a bottle
with you. I know t!tis one. It's good for him to drink good wine."
"I don't want to drink too much, cherie," David said to
Madame. "Because tomorrow is a bad day and I'd rather riot feel
bad too."
''You won't. 1 know you. Just eat now to piease me."
She excused herself in a few minutes and was gone for a
quarter of an hour. David ate all of his chicken and the salad finally and after she had come back they all had a glass of wine together and then David and Marita.said good night to Madame
who was very formal now and went out onto the terrace and
looked at the night. They were both in a hurry and David was
carrying the opened bottle of wine in an ice bucket. He put it
down on the stove and took Marita in his arms and kissed her.
They held each other close and said nothing and then David
picked up the bucket and they walked to Marita's room.
Her bed had been made up now for two people and David put
the ice bucket down on the floor and said, "Madame."
''Yes,'' Marita said. "Naturally."
They lay together with the night clear and cool outside and
the small breeze frOl!l the sea and Marita said, "I love you,
David, and it's so sure now."
Sure, David thought. Sure. Nothing is sure.
"All the time before now," Marita said, "before I could sleep
a.II night-with you I've thought and thought you wouldn't like the
sort of wife who couldn't sleep."
"What sort of wife are you?"
''You'll see. A happy one now."
.,' .. 
Ernest Hemingway
Then he felt it was a long time before he went to sleep but re· ally it was not and when he woke at the first gray light he saw Marita in the bed' beside him and was h~ppy until he rem~m·
bered what had happened. He was very careful not to wake her
but when she stirred he kissed her before he stepped out of bed.
She smiled and said, "Good morning, David," and he said, "Go
back to sleep my dear~st love."
She said, "All right," and rolled over quickly like a small ani·
mal and, dark headed, lay curled up with her closed eyes away . from the light and her long dark shiny eyelashes against the rose
,brown early morning color of her skin. David looked at her and
thought how beautiful she was and how he could see h~r spirit had not gone from her body when she slept. She was lovely and her coloring and the unbelievable smoothness of her skin were
almost Javanese, he thought. He watched the coloring in· her
face deepen as t.he light grew stronger. Then he shook his head
and carrying his clothing on his left ann opened and dosed the
door and went out into the new morning, walking barefoot on
the stones that were still wet with dew.
In his and Catherine's room he took a shower, shaved, found
a fresh shirt and shorts aRd put them on, looked around the
empty bedroom, the first morning he had ever been in it with
Catherine not there, and then went out to the empty kitchen
and found a tin of Maquereau Vin Blanc Capitaine Cook and
opened it and took it, .perilous with edge.level juice, with a cold
bottle of the Tuborg beer out to the bar.
He opened the beer, took the bottle top between his right thumb and the first joint of his right forefinger and bent it in
until it was flattened together, put it in his pocket since he saw
no container to toss it into, raised the bottle that was stiII cold to
his hand and now beaded wet in his fingeis and, -smelling the
aroma from the 9pened tin of spiced and marinated mackerel, he
took a long drink of the cold beer, set it down on the, bar and
THE GARD'EN OF EDEN 237
took an-envelope from his hip pocket and unfolded Catherine's
letter and commenced to reread it.
David, I knew very suddenly you must know how terrible it
was. Worse than hitting someone, a child is the worst I
guess-with a car. The thump on the fender or maybe just a small bump and then all the rest of it happening and the crowd gathering to scream. The Frenchwoman screaming ecra5Seuse even if it was the child's fault. I did it and I knew I
did it and I can't undo it, It's too awful to understand. But it
happened.
I'll cut this short, I'll be back and we'll settle things the best
we can. Do not worry at all. I'll wire and write and do all the
things for my book so if you ever finish it only I will try to do this one thing, I had to burn the other things. The worst was being righteous about it but I don't have to tell yQU that. I do
not ask for forgive.ness but please have good luck and I will do everything as well as I can.
Heiress has been good to you and me both and I don't
hate her,
I won't end as I'd like to because it would sound too pre- posterous to believe but I will sayit anyway since I was always rude and presumptuous and preposterous too lately as we both know, I love you and I always will and I am sorry, What
a useless word.
Catherine
After he had finished it he read it through again.
He had never read any other letters from Catherine because
from the time they had met at ~he Crillon bar in Paris until they
were married at the American church at Avenue Hoche they had seen each other every day and, reading this first one now for
the third time, he found that he still could be, and was, .moved by her.
He put the letter ba~kin his hip pocket and ate a second small, plump, miniature mackerel in the aromatic white wine sauce and 
Er'nest Hemingway
finished the cold beer. Then he went out to the kitchen for a
piece of bread to sop up the liquid in the long tin and for a fresh
bottle of beer. He would try to work today and would almost
tainly fail. There had been too much emotion, too much damage, too much of everything and his changing of allegiance, no
matter how sound it had seemed, no matter how it simplified
things for him, was a grave and violent thing and this letter cpmpounded the gravityand,the
All right Bourne, he thought as' he began to drink the second
beer, don't spend time thinking how bad things are because you
know. You have three choices. Try to remember one that is gone
and write it again. Second, you can try a new one. And third,
·write on the god damned narrative; So sharpen up and take the
best one. You always gambled when you could bet on yourself.
Never bet on anything that can talk, your father said and you
said, Except yourself. And he said, Not me, Davey, but pile it on
yourself sometime you iron-hearted little bastard. He meant to
say cold-hearted but he turned it kindly with his gently lying
mouth. Or maybe he meant it. Don't con yourself on Tuborg
beer. •
So take the best one and write one new and good as you can.
And remember, Marita has been hit as badly as you. Maybe
worse. So gamble. She cares as much for what we lost as you do.
Chapter Twenty-nine
WHEN HE FINALLY gave up writing that day it was afternoon. He
had started a sentence as soon as he had gone into his working
room and had completed it but he could write nothing after it.
He crossed it out and started another sentence and again came
to the complete blankness. He was unable to write the sentence
that should follow although he knew/it. He wrote a first simple
declarative sentence again and it was impossible for him to 'put
down the next sentence on paper. At the end of two hours it was
the same. He could not write more than a single sentence and
the sentences themselves were increasingly simple and completelyduil. He kept at itfor four·hours before he knew that resolution was powerless against what had happened. He admitted
it without accepting it, dosed and put away the notebook with
the rows of crossed out lines and to find the girl.
She was on the terrace in the sun reading and when she
looked up and saw his face she said, "No?"
"Worse than no."
"Not at all?" 
Ern,est Hemingway
"Let's have a drink," Marita said.
"Good," said David.
They were inside at the bar and the day had come in with
them. It was as good as the day before and perhaps better since
summer should have been gone and each warm day was an extra thing. We·should not waste it, David- thought. We should try
to make it good and save it if we can. He mixed the martinis and
poured them and when they tasted them they were icy cold, and dry.
''You were right to try this morning," Manta said. "But let's
not think about it any more today."
"Good," he said.
He reached for the bottle of Gordon's, the NoiIly Prat and the
stirring pitcher, poured out the water from ~he ice, and using his
empty glass commenced to !lleasure out two more drinks.
"It's a lovely day," he said. "W'hat should we do?"
"Let's go to swim now," Marita said. "So we won't waste the
day."
"Good," David said. "Should I tell Madame that we'll be late
for lunch?"
"She put a cold lunch up," Marita said. "I thought that prob~
ably you'd like to swim however work went."
"That was intelligent," David said. "How is Madame?"
"She has a slightly discolored eye," Madta said.
"No."
Manta laughed.
They drove up the r.oad and around the promontory through the forest and left the car in the broken shade of the pine woods
and carried the lunch basket and the beach gear down the trail to
the cove. There was a little breeze from the east and the sea was
dark and blue as they came down through the stone pines. The rocks were red and the sand of the cove was yellow and wrinkled and the water, as they came to it, clean and now amber
clear over the sand. They put the basket and the rucksack in the
THE GARDEN ·OF EDEN 24'
shade of the biggest rock and undressed and David climbed the
tall ro~k to dive. He stood there naked and brown'in the sun
looking out to the sea.
"Want to dive?" he called.
She shook her head.
, "I'll wait for you."
"No," she called up and waded out into the water up to her
thighs.
"How is it?" David called down.
"Much cooler than it's ever been. Almost cold."
"Good," he said, and as she watched him and waded, the water came over her belly and touched her breasts and he straight- ened, rose on his toes, seemed to hang slowly without falling and then knifed out and down, 'making a boil in the water that a
porpoise might have made reentering slickly into the hole that
he had made in rising. She swam out toward the circle of milling' water and then he rose beside her and held her up and close and
then put his salty mouth against her own.
"Elle est bonne, la mer," he said. "Toi aussi."
They swam' out of the cove and beyond into the deep water
past where the mountain dropped down into the sea, and Jay on their' backs and floated. The water was colder than it had been
but the very top was warmed a little and Marita floated with her
back arched high, her head all underwater but her nose, and her brown b~easts were lapped gently by the movement the light breeze gave the sea. Her eyes were shut against the sun and
David was beside her in the water. His arm was under her head'
and then he kissed the tip of her left breast and then the other
breast.
"They taste like the sea," he s:aid.
"Let's go to sleep out here."
"Could you?"
"It's too. hard to keep my back arched."
"Let's swim way out and then swim in."
-._,. 
Ern 'e s tHe m i n'g way
"All right."
They swam far out, further than they had ever swum bE;fore, far enough so they could see past the next headland and on out
until they could see the broken purple line of the mountains behind the forest. They lay there in the water and watched the
coast. Then they swam in slowly. They stopped to rest when
they lost the mountains and again when they lost the headland
and then swam slowly and strongly on in past the entrance to
the cove and pulled themselves out on the beach.
"Are you tired?" David asked.
''Very,'' Manta said. She had never swum that far before.
"Are you still pounding?"
"Oh I'm fine."
David walked up the beach and over to the rock and found
one of the bottles of Tavel and two towels.
''You look like a seal," David said Sitting down beside her on
the sand.
He handed her the Tavel and she drank from the bottIe and
handed it back. He took a long drink and then on the smooth dry sand, stretched out in the sun, the lunch basket by them and the
wine cool as they drank from the bottle. Marita said, "Catherine
wouldn't have gotten tir€d."
"The hell she wouldn't. She never swam that far."
'Truly?"
"We swam a long way, girl. I was never out where we could see
those backdrop mountains before."
"All right," she said. ''There' isn't anything_we can do about
her'today so let's not think about it. David?"
''Yes.''
"Do you still love me?"
''Yes. Very much."
"Perhaps I made a great mistake with you and you're just be- ing kind to me."
''You didn't make any mistakes and I'm not being kind to you."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
Marita took a handful of radishes and ate them slowly and drank some wine. The radishes were young and crisp and sharp in flavor.
"You don't have to worry about working," she said. "I knOw. That will be all "ght."
"Sure," David said.
He cut one of the artichoke hearts up with the fork and ate a
chunk swirled in the mustard sauce Madame had made.
"May I have the Tavel?" Marita said. She took a good swallow of the wine and set the bottle down by David putting its base firmly in the sand and leaning it against the basket. "Isn't it a
good lunch Madame made, David?"
"It's an excelIent lunch. DidAurol really give her a black eye?" "Not a real one."
'''She has a bad tongue with him."
'There's the difference in age and he was Within his rights to hit her if she was insulting. She said so. At the end. And she
sent you messages."
''What messages?"
"Just loving messages."
"Sh.e loves you," David said.
"No. You stupid. She's only on my side."
"There aren't any sides anymore," David said.
"No," Marita said. "And we didn't try to make sides. It just happened."
"It happened all right." David handed her the jar with the cut
up artichoke heart and 'the dressing and found the second bottle of Tavel. It was still cool. He took a long drink of the wine.
'We've been burned out," he said. "Crazy woman burned, out
the Bournes."
"Are we the Bournes?"
"Sure. We're the Bournes. It may take a while to have the papers. But that's what we are. Do you want me to \\!rite it out? I
think I could write that." 
244 Ernest HemLngway
''You don't need to write it."
"I'll write it in the sand," David said.
They slept well and naturally through the late afternoon and
when the sun was low Marita woke and saw David lying in the bed -by her side. His lips were dosed and he was breathing very
slo~ly and she looked at his face and his covered eyes that she had only seen lidded in sleep. twice before and looked at his
chest and his body with the anns straight by his sides. "She went
over to the door of the bathroom and looked-at herself in -the fun
length mirror. Then she smiled -at the mirror. W~en she was
dressed she went out to the kitchen and talked \\lith Madame.
Later, David was still asleep and she sat by him on the bed. In
the dusk his hair was whitish against his dark face, and she
waited for him to wake.
They sat at the bar and were both drinking Haig Pinch and
Perrier. Marita was b.eing very careful with her drink. She said,
"I think you should go to, town every day and get the papers and have a drink and read by yourself. -I wish there was a club or a
real cafe where you met your friends."
"There isn't."
"Well, 1 think it would be good every day for yo'u to be away 'from me for a while when you're not working. You've been over-'
run with girls. I'm always going to see you have your men friends. That's one thing very bad that Catherine did."
"Not on purpose and it was my own fault."
"Maybe that's true. But do)'Qu think we'll have friends? Good friends?" -
"We each have one already."
'Will we have others?"
"Maybe."
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
"Will they take you away because they know more than 1 do?"
"They won't know more."
"Will they come along young and new and fresh with new
things and you be tired of me?"
"They won't and I won't be."
"'I'll kill them if they do. I'm not going to give you away to anyone the way she did."
"That's good."
"I want you to have men friends and friends from the war a.nd
to shoot with and to play cards at the dub. But we don't have to
have you have women friends, do we? Fresh, new ones who will
fall in love and really understand you and all that?"
"I don't run around with women. You know that."
"They are new all the time," Marita said. 'There are new ones
every day. No I;me can ever be sufficien~Iy warned. You most of
all."
"I love you," David said, "and you're my partner too. But take
it ea~y. Just be with me."
"I'm with you."
"I know it and I love to look,atyou and know you're here and
that we'll sleep together and be h~ppy:"
In the dark, Marita lay against him and he, felt her breasts
against his chest and her arm behind his head and her hand
touching him and lips against his.
"I'm your girl," she said in the dark.. ''Your girl. No matter
what I'm always your girl. Your good girl who loves you."
"Yes, my dearest love. Sleep weU. Sleep well."
''You go to sleep first," ~arita said, "and I'll be back in a
minute."
He was asleep when she came back -and she got in under the
sheet and lay beside him. H'e was sleeping on his right side and breathing softly and steadily. 
Chapter Thirty
DAVID WOKE IN TIlE MORNING when the first light in the
window. It was still gray outside and there were different pine
trunks than the ones he usuaIIy woke to see and a longer gap
beyond them toward the sea. His right ann was stiff because he
had slept on it. Then, awake, he knew he was in a strange bed
and he saw Marita lying sleeping by him. He remembered
everydiing and he looked at her lovingly and covered her fresh
brown body with the sheet and then kissed her very lightly again
and putting on his dressing gown walked out into the dew-wet
early morning carrying the image of how she looked with him to
his room. He took a cold shower, shaved, put on a shirt and a
pair of shorts and walked down to his working room. He stopped
at the door of Marita's room and-.opened it very carefully. He
stood and looked at her sleeping, and closed the door softly and
went into the room where he worked. He got out his pencils and
a new cahier, sharpened five pencils and began to write the
story of his father and the raid in the year of the
rebellion that had started with the trek across the bitter lake. He

made the crossing now and completed the dreadful trek of the
first ,day when the sunrise had caught them With the part that
had to be done in the dark only half finished and the mirages
ready making as the heat- became unbearable. By the time the
morning ,was well advffitced and a strong fresh east was
through the pines from the sea had finished the
night at the first camp under the fig trees where" the water came
down from the escarpment and was moving out of that camp in
the early.morning and up the "long draw that le.d to the steep_ cut
up onto the escarpment.
He found he knew muth more about his father than when he
had first written this story and he knew he could measure his
progress by the small things which made his father more tactile
" and to have more dimensions than he had in the story before. He
was fortunate, just now, that'his father was not a simple man.
David wrote steadily and well and the sentences that he had
made before came to him complete and entire and he put them
down, corrected them, and cut them as if he were going over
proof. Not a sentence was missing and there were many that he
put down as they were returned to him without changing them.
By two o'clock he had recovered, corrected and improved what
it had taken him five days to write originally. He wrote on a
while longer now and there was no sign that any of it would ever
cease returning to, him intact. 
